versioned_docs/version-4.0/upgrading-solidus/v3.4.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

import PRLink from '@site/src/theme/PRLink';
import MinimalRequirements from '@site/src/theme/MinimalRequirements';

# Solidus v3.4 (2023-04-21)

<MinimalRequirements ruby="2.7" rails="6.0" />

This is a slimmer release, but a very important one as it'll be the last on the 3.x series. [Following our policy](https://solidus.io/release_policy/#last_minor_before_major), there won't be other changes except removing deprecated code in release v4. That means if you adapt your store to be free of warnings, you should be ready to go when v4 is out (and it's just around the corner!).

Please, remember to review our generic [upgrade guides](/getting-started/upgrading-solidus.mdx) and run the `bin/rails g solidus:update` task. You can also check the complete [Changelog](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/v3.4/CHANGELOG.md) in our repository.

## <PRLink description="New taxon and taxonomy validations" number="4851" />

New validations were added to the `Taxon` and `Taxonomy` models but are behind the new temporary `extra_taxon_validations` and `extra_taxonomy_validations` preferences.

- Taxonomy must have a unique name.
- Taxon must have a unique name under the same parent Taxon (or at root level).
- A validation was added in Taxon to ensure Taxonomies can only have one root Taxon.

Before using the new preferences, ensure you don't have any now invalid Taxons or Taxonomies on production:

1. Pull the production Taxons and Taxonomies to a development or staging environment.
2. Set the new preferences to `true`.
3. Run `Spree::Taxon.all.select(&:invalid?)` and `Spree::Taxonomy.all.select(&:invalid?)`.
4. If you don't have empty arrays, you'll need to manually fix these records on production (warning you may have products attached to these Taxons/Taxonomies).

If you had any invalid records, take caution in case you have any code that creates Taxons or Taxonomies.

On top of that, some of your tests may break if you have incorrectly built Taxons. We've also added some help to fix those factories:

- Now, if you pass just a `parent` Taxon, the Taxonomy will be inferred from the `parent`.
- As before, if you pass no `taxonomy`, a Taxonomy and its root Taxon will be made.
- Now, the `parent` will be inferred from the given `taxonomy` or default created Taxonomy. This means, the created Taxon will always be nested (if you want a root Taxon, create a Taxonomy and get its root).

## <PRLink description="Configurable order update attributes class" number="4955" />

`Spree::OrderUpdateAttributes` class is no longer hard-coded. That will grant you flexibility if you need to store additional attributes during checkout.

You need to configure your class in the new `order_update_attributes_class`. Make sure it follows the same signature as the default one:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
Spree.config do |config|
  # ...
  config.order_update_attributes_class = 'MyStore::OrderUpdateAttributes'
end
```

```ruby title="app/models/my_store/order_update_attributes.rb"
module MyStore
  class OrderUpdateAttributes
    def initialize(order, update_params, request_env:)
      @order = order
      @update_params = update_params
      @request_env = request_env
    end

    def call
      # true || false
    end
  end
end
```

## <PRLink description="Configure allowed ransackable scopes" number="4956" />

We already had allowed ransackable attributes and associations to configure [authorization on Ransack](https://activerecord-hackery.github.io/ransack/going-further/other-notes/#authorization-allowlistingdenylisting). We added the missing `allowed_ransackable_scopes` piece, allowing you to modify the defaults without overriding the `.ransack_scopes` method:

```ruby
Spree::Product.allowed_ransackable_scopes.concat([:new_scope])
```

## <PRLink description="Improvements for the risk analysis report" number="4883" />

The payment risk analysis summary rendered for orders considered dangerous now contains information for all the associated payments instead of only considering the last one.

## <PRLink description="Easily change from frontend to admin view for an order" number="4886" />

That's a small quality of life improvement. If you're checking out an order in the storefront, you can now prepend `/admin` to the route and land in the admin panel counterpart. Very helpful during development and testing.

## <PRLink description="All-encompassing update task" number="4957" />

Before, running `bin/rails solidus:update` would only generate the initializer to [update default Solidus preferences](../getting-started/upgrading-solidus#updating-preferences]). Now, it'll also copy the new migration files to your host application. Remember, you'll still need to check and run them by yourself.

## <PRLink description="Deprecate promotions with an `any` policy" number="4991" />

Actually, promotions with a `match_policy` of `any` were deprecated on v3.2. We forgot to add a deprecation warning, so you may only realize it now.

As a reminder, if you have promotions with such a match policy, try running the following rake task:

```bash
bin/rake solidus:split_promotions_with_any_match_policy
```

That will create separate promotions for each of the rules of your promotions with `any` match policy, which should have the same outcome for customers.

## <PRLink description="Deprecation of payment offsets" number="5008" />

That's just some dangling code removal, as payment offsets (the old refund system) have not been used on Solidus for a long time. You must move entirely to the well-established refund system if you're still using them.

## <PRLink description="Deprecated `#line_item_shipment_price`" number="4876" />

The `Admin::OrdersHelper#line_item_shipment_price` method has been deprecated. You can use the equivalent `Spree::LineItem#display_amount` instead.

Commit message:

Make the PRLink use the tag contents as the title
This makes it work with non-docusaurus enabled preview systems and MD
renderers.

versioned_docs/version-4.0/upgrading-solidus/v3.4.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

import PRLink from '@site/src/theme/PRLink';
import MinimalRequirements from '@site/src/theme/MinimalRequirements';

# Solidus v3.4 (2023-04-21)

<MinimalRequirements ruby="2.7" rails="6.0" />

This is a slimmer release, but a very important one as it'll be the last on the 3.x series. [Following our policy](https://solidus.io/release_policy/#last_minor_before_major), there won't be other changes except removing deprecated code in release v4. That means if you adapt your store to be free of warnings, you should be ready to go when v4 is out (and it's just around the corner!).

Please, remember to review our generic [upgrade guides](/getting-started/upgrading-solidus.mdx) and run the `bin/rails g solidus:update` task. You can also check the complete [Changelog](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/v3.4/CHANGELOG.md) in our repository.

## <PRLink number="4851">New taxon and taxonomy validations</PRLink>

New validations were added to the `Taxon` and `Taxonomy` models but are behind the new temporary `extra_taxon_validations` and `extra_taxonomy_validations` preferences.

- Taxonomy must have a unique name.
- Taxon must have a unique name under the same parent Taxon (or at root level).
- A validation was added in Taxon to ensure Taxonomies can only have one root Taxon.

Before using the new preferences, ensure you don't have any now invalid Taxons or Taxonomies on production:

1. Pull the production Taxons and Taxonomies to a development or staging environment.
2. Set the new preferences to `true`.
3. Run `Spree::Taxon.all.select(&:invalid?)` and `Spree::Taxonomy.all.select(&:invalid?)`.
4. If you don't have empty arrays, you'll need to manually fix these records on production (warning you may have products attached to these Taxons/Taxonomies).

If you had any invalid records, take caution in case you have any code that creates Taxons or Taxonomies.

On top of that, some of your tests may break if you have incorrectly built Taxons. We've also added some help to fix those factories:

- Now, if you pass just a `parent` Taxon, the Taxonomy will be inferred from the `parent`.
- As before, if you pass no `taxonomy`, a Taxonomy and its root Taxon will be made.
- Now, the `parent` will be inferred from the given `taxonomy` or default created Taxonomy. This means, the created Taxon will always be nested (if you want a root Taxon, create a Taxonomy and get its root).

## <PRLink number="4955">Configurable order update attributes class</PRLink>

`Spree::OrderUpdateAttributes` class is no longer hard-coded. That will grant you flexibility if you need to store additional attributes during checkout.

You need to configure your class in the new `order_update_attributes_class`. Make sure it follows the same signature as the default one:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
Spree.config do |config|
  # ...
  config.order_update_attributes_class = 'MyStore::OrderUpdateAttributes'
end
```

```ruby title="app/models/my_store/order_update_attributes.rb"
module MyStore
  class OrderUpdateAttributes
    def initialize(order, update_params, request_env:)
      @order = order
      @update_params = update_params
      @request_env = request_env
    end

    def call
      # true || false
    end
  end
end
```

## <PRLink number="4956">Configure allowed ransackable scopes</PRLink>

We already had allowed ransackable attributes and associations to configure [authorization on Ransack](https://activerecord-hackery.github.io/ransack/going-further/other-notes/#authorization-allowlistingdenylisting). We added the missing `allowed_ransackable_scopes` piece, allowing you to modify the defaults without overriding the `.ransack_scopes` method:

```ruby
Spree::Product.allowed_ransackable_scopes.concat([:new_scope])
```

## <PRLink number="4883">Improvements for the risk analysis report</PRLink>

The payment risk analysis summary rendered for orders considered dangerous now contains information for all the associated payments instead of only considering the last one.

## <PRLink number="4886">Easily change from frontend to admin view for an order</PRLink>

That's a small quality of life improvement. If you're checking out an order in the storefront, you can now prepend `/admin` to the route and land in the admin panel counterpart. Very helpful during development and testing.

## <PRLink number="4957">All-encompassing update task</PRLink>

Before, running `bin/rails solidus:update` would only generate the initializer to [update default Solidus preferences](../getting-started/upgrading-solidus#updating-preferences]). Now, it'll also copy the new migration files to your host application. Remember, you'll still need to check and run them by yourself.

## <PRLink number="4991">Deprecate promotions with an `any` policy</PRLink>

Actually, promotions with a `match_policy` of `any` were deprecated on v3.2. We forgot to add a deprecation warning, so you may only realize it now.

As a reminder, if you have promotions with such a match policy, try running the following rake task:

```bash
bin/rake solidus:split_promotions_with_any_match_policy
```

That will create separate promotions for each of the rules of your promotions with `any` match policy, which should have the same outcome for customers.

## <PRLink number="5008">Deprecation of payment offsets</PRLink>

That's just some dangling code removal, as payment offsets (the old refund system) have not been used on Solidus for a long time. You must move entirely to the well-established refund system if you're still using them.

## <PRLink number="4876">Deprecated `#line_item_shipment_price`</PRLink>

The `Admin::OrdersHelper#line_item_shipment_price` method has been deprecated. You can use the equivalent `Spree::LineItem#display_amount` instead.
