docs/getting-started/installing-solidus.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Installing Solidus

This guide will teach what each you how to install Solidus and configure Solidus in a new or
existing Rails application.

## System requirements

Solidus requires the following software on the host to run properly:

* [Ruby](https://www.ruby-lang.org) interpreter: Solidus always supports the oldest maintained Ruby
branch.
* [Rails](https://www.rubyonrails.org): Solidus always supports the oldest maintained Rails version.
* Relational database: the core and the extensions are always tested
with [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com) and [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org), but other
relational databases should work as well.
* [ImageMagick](http://imagemagick.org/script/download.php): this is needed for manipulating product
images and other assets.

## Library architecture

Solidus has been designed as an ecosystem of independent libraries (_gems_, in the Ruby world) that
work well in isolation, but collaborate to give you an amazing eCommerce experience when used
together. A standard Solidus installation is composed of the following gems:

* [solidus\_core](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/core): provides the core data
models and eCommerce business logic. This is the bare minimum for a Solidus install.
* [solidus\_backend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/backend): provides the
standard Solidus backend, a powerful administrative UI you can use to manage your Solidus store.
* [solidus\_frontend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/frontend): provides the
standard Solidus storefront along with helpers to build your own.
* [solidus\_api](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api): provides the Solidus REST
API. The API is required by the backend, but you may also use it for your own purposes (e.g. for
JS interactions in the storefront).

For maximum flexibility, you can decide you just want to install specific gems and build the rest of
the functionality yourself. Or, if you want the full-fledged Solidus experience, you can install
the [solidus](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus) gem, which ties them all together and will give
you a complete store. This is the approach we'll be following in this guide.

## Installation steps

### In a new app

If you don't have an existing Ruby on Rails application yet, simply create one with Sqlite3 as your
database:

```bash
$ rails new amazing_store --skip-javascript
```

Solidus doesn't require the JavaScript compiler shipped with Rails by default (Webpacker). You are
still free to install it and use it in your store, though.

Once you have generated your new Rails application, you can proceed as if you were installing
Solidus [in an existing app](#in-an-existing-app).

### In an existing app

If you have an existing Ruby on Rails application, installing Solidus is fairly simple. In your CLI:

```bash
$ bundle add 'solidus'
$ bin/rails generate solidus:install
```

The installer will prompt you on a few questions before completing the
installation. It will ask if you would like to use the default authentication
solution, [Devise](https://github.com/heartcombo/devise), or your implement
your own. Finally, you will be prompted for an admin email and password. You
can leave the default (email: admin@example.com, password: test123) or enter
your own.

Once the installation has completed, you can now start your Rails server:

```bash
$ bin/rails server
```

You should now be able to access your storefront at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).
You can also access Solidus' admin UI at [http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin).

## First-time configuration

Once Solidus has been installed, you can get a feel of its configuration options by looking at the
generated initializer in `config/initializers/spree.rb`.

The very first line on it will be very similar to this one:

```ruby
Spree.load_defaults '3.2'
```

Some of the default values for Solidus preferences depend on the Solidus version. That line makes
sure you use the defaults for the version you have just installed.

:::info

You'll have to bump the loaded version when
you [upgrade to a new Solidus version](upgrading-solidus.mdx#updating-preferences).

:::

Right after that, you'll see a block for the preferences that apply to the core component:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.currency = "USD"
  # ...
end
```

Take a look at
the [`Spree::AppConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/core/lib/spree/app\_configuration.rb)
class for all the available settings. You can adjust some of them now, but you will probably want to
revisit them as you develop your store and customize Solidus to fit your needs.

Finally, the initializer contains a block for all the other components you have installed. For
instance:

```ruby
Spree::Api::Config.configure do |config|
  config.requires_authentication = true
end
```

Just like for the core,
see [`Spree::ApiConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/api/lib/spree/api\_configuration.rb)
and [`Spree::BackendConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/backend/lib/spree/backend\_configuration.rb)
for the complete list of settings.

:::info

You can inspect the current values for the settings running `Spree::Config` for core
and `Spree::Backend::Config` or `Spree::Api::Config` for the backend and API components,
respectively, in the console.

:::

Commit message:

Update references to point to the new solidus_starter_frontend
The "Creating your storefront" guide will be tackled in a separated
commit.

docs/getting-started/installing-solidus.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Installing Solidus

This guide will teach what each you how to install Solidus and configure Solidus in a new or
existing Rails application.

## System requirements

Solidus requires the following software on the host to run properly:

* [Ruby](https://www.ruby-lang.org) interpreter: Solidus always supports the oldest maintained Ruby
branch.
* [Rails](https://www.rubyonrails.org): Solidus always supports the oldest maintained Rails version.
* Relational database: the core and the extensions are always tested
with [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com) and [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org), but other
relational databases should work as well.
* [ImageMagick](http://imagemagick.org/script/download.php): this is needed for manipulating product
images and other assets.

## Library architecture

Solidus has been designed as an ecosystem of independent libraries (_gems_, in the Ruby world) that
work well in isolation, but collaborate to give you an amazing eCommerce experience when used
together. A standard Solidus installation is composed of the following gems:

* [solidus\_core](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/core): provides the core data
models and eCommerce business logic. This is the bare minimum for a Solidus install.
* [solidus\_backend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/backend): provides the
standard Solidus backend, a powerful administrative UI you can use to manage your Solidus store.
standard Solidus storefront along with helpers to build your own.
* [solidus\_api](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api): provides the Solidus REST
API. The API is required by the backend, but you may also use it for your own purposes (e.g. for
JS interactions in the storefront).

Besides, Solidus aims to be agnostic of the storefront. We provide
[solidus\_starter\_frontend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_starter_frontend)
as a bootstrap solution from which a tailored store can be built. Otherwise,
you can create your storefront from scratch using whatever technology you
prefer.

For maximum flexibility, you can decide you just want to install specific gems and build the rest of
the functionality yourself. Or, if you want the full-fledged Solidus experience, you can install
the [solidus](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus) gem, which ties them all together and will give
you a complete store. This is the approach we'll be following in this guide.

## Installation steps

### In a new app

If you don't have an existing Ruby on Rails application yet, simply create one with Sqlite3 as your
database:

```bash
$ rails new amazing_store --skip-javascript
```

Solidus doesn't require the JavaScript compiler shipped with Rails by default (Webpacker). You are
still free to install it and use it in your store, though.

Once you have generated your new Rails application, you can proceed as if you were installing
Solidus [in an existing app](#in-an-existing-app).

### In an existing app

If you have an existing Ruby on Rails application, installing Solidus is fairly simple. In your CLI:

```bash
$ bundle add 'solidus'
$ bin/rails generate solidus:install
```

The installer will prompt you on a few questions before completing the
installation:

- It will ask if you would like to use the default authentication solution,
[Devise](https://github.com/heartcombo/devise), or implement your own.
- It will also prompt you to choose which storefront you want to install. We
recommend picking
[solidus\_starter\_frontend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_starter_frontend)
to quickly get up & running. You might need to choose the deprecated
[solidus\_frontend](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_frontend) if you want
to use an extension that still relies on it. There's also the option to choose
no frontend.
- Finally, you will be prompted for an admin email and password. You can leave
the default (email: admin@example.com, password: test123) or enter your own.

Once the installation has completed, you can now start your Rails server:

```bash
$ bin/rails server
```

You should now be able to access your storefront at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).
You can also access Solidus' admin UI at [http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin).

## First-time configuration

Once Solidus has been installed, you can get a feel of its configuration options by looking at the
generated initializer in `config/initializers/spree.rb`.

The very first line on it will be very similar to this one:

```ruby
Spree.load_defaults '3.2'
```

Some of the default values for Solidus preferences depend on the Solidus version. That line makes
sure you use the defaults for the version you have just installed.

:::info

You'll have to bump the loaded version when
you [upgrade to a new Solidus version](upgrading-solidus.mdx#updating-preferences).

:::

Right after that, you'll see a block for the preferences that apply to the core component:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.currency = "USD"
  # ...
end
```

Take a look at
the [`Spree::AppConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/core/lib/spree/app\_configuration.rb)
class for all the available settings. You can adjust some of them now, but you will probably want to
revisit them as you develop your store and customize Solidus to fit your needs.

Finally, the initializer contains a block for all the other components you have installed. For
instance:

```ruby
Spree::Api::Config.configure do |config|
  config.requires_authentication = true
end
```

Just like for the core,
see [`Spree::ApiConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/api/lib/spree/api\_configuration.rb)
and [`Spree::BackendConfiguration`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/backend/lib/spree/backend\_configuration.rb)
for the complete list of settings.

:::info

You can inspect the current values for the settings running `Spree::Config` for core
and `Spree::Backend::Config` or `Spree::Api::Config` for the backend and API components,
respectively, in the console.

:::
