docs/customization/customizing-the-api.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 5
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Customizing the API

This guide will teach you how to customize Solidus' REST API.

## Introduction to the REST API

:::info

We also provide a GraphQL API, if you're more into
that. [Check it out!](https://github.com/solidusio-contrib/solidus_graphql_api)

:::

Solidus comes with a complete [REST API](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api) that
allows you to manage all aspects of your store. In some cases, you may want to extend the API's
functionality by adding new endpoints and customizing the existing ones. Like all other parts of
Solidus, the API is a Rails engine, which means you can use the regular tools at your disposal to
customize its behavior.

:::danger

The API is also used by the default Solidus backend to perform certain tasks without reloading the
page. If you are modifying an endpoint's input schema or heavily customizing its output, make sure
you are not accidentally breaking your backend! If in doubt, you can always create a new endpoint
for your purposes.

:::

In this guide, we'll see how to implement a quick-and-dirty API for customers to "like" a certain
product, so that you know which products customer like the most. We'll implement a new endpoint for
liking a product and we'll add a `likes_count` attribute to the
existing [products API](https://solidus.docs.stoplight.io/api-reference/products/list-products).

Let's get started!

## Designing your resources

First of all, we need to make sure users can somehow tell us that they like a product. Because we
want this to happen without users having to reload the page, we'll do it via the API.

We could just add a `likes_count` column to the `spree_products` table, but in our case we also want
to know which users liked which products, so that a product cannot be liked twice by the same user
and we can personalize the user's recommendations based on the products they liked. We will also
want to make sure that unauthenticated users cannot like a product, because we wouldn't be able to
associate that like to a specific customer.

Let's start by creating a new model, `ProductLike`, which we'll use to store the user-product
relationship:

```bash
$ rails g model ProductLike user:belongs_to product:belongs_to
```

We'll need to edit the model generated by this command to specify the full namespace of our
associated models:

```ruby title="app/models/product_like.rb"
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :product, class_name: 'Spree::Product'
  belongs_to :user, class_name: 'Spree::User'
end
```

We'll also have to edit the migration manually to specify the correct table names for the foreign
keys:

```ruby
class CreateProductLikes < ActiveRecord::Migration[6.0]
  def change
    create_table :product_likes do |t|
      t.integer :user_id, null: false
      t.integer :product_id, null: false

      t.foreign_key :spree_users, column: :user_id, on_delete: :cascade
      t.foreign_key :spree_products, column: :product_id, on_delete: :cascade

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Once we're done, we can run the migration with the usual command:

```bash
$ rails db:migrate
```

Finally, we will add a uniqueness validation to our model:

```ruby title="app/models/product_like.rb"
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  # ...
  validates :user, uniqueness: { scope: :product_id }
end
```

Now that we have our model in place, we're ready to start creating an API endpoint for liking
products!

## Creating a new endpoint

Implementing a new API endpoint is fairly simple: all we have to do is create a new controller along
with its actions, routes and views, just like we would do in a regular Rails application. For our
use case, we'll want to create a `ProductLikesController` with a `create` action that allows us to
like a product.

:::info
We could also add a `like` action to the existing `Spree::Api::ProductsController`. However, it's
recommended to follow RESTful resource naming when creating new API endpoints. This makes our API
easier to understand, consume and maintain.
:::

Let's create our controller first:

```ruby title="app/controllers/spree/api/product\_likes\_controller.rb"
module Spree
  module Api
    class ProductLikesController < Spree::Api::BaseController
      def create
        @product = find_product(params[:product_id])
        @like = ProductLike.new(product: @product, user: current_api_user)

        if @like.save
          render :show, status: :no_content
        else
          invalid_resource!(@like)
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

In our controller, we are relying on a few helpers Solidus provides out of the box:

* `find_product` retrieves a product by its numeric ID or slug.
* `current_api_user` retrieves the currently authenticated user \(by default, all API requests
require authentication\).
* `invalid_resource!` generates a 422 response that exposes all the error messages on an
ActiveModel-compliant object.

Now that we have the controller, let's also create the corresponding view:

```ruby title="app/views/spree/api/product\_likes/show.json.jbuilder"
json.user_id(@like.user_id)
json.partial!("spree/api/products/product", product: @like.product)
```

In the view, we are using [JBuilder](https://github.com/rails/jbuilder) to create a JSON
representation of our `ProductLike` instance. The user ID is represented as an integer, while the
product is transformed into a full JSON object by using Solidus' `_product.json.jbuilder` partial.

And finally, let's add a route to the controller action:

```ruby title="config/routes.rb"
# ...
Spree::Core::Engine.routes.draw do
  namespace :api, defaults: { format: 'json' } do
    resources :products do
      resource :product_like, only: :create
    end
  end
end
```

In the route, you may notice we are using a singleton resource \(`resource :product_like`\) rather
than a collection \(`resource :product_likes`\). This is because a user may only have one like for a
product. We are also limiting the routes for that resource to the `:create` action, since we are not
going to implement the others.

:::info
Solidus provides a lot more partials, helpers and utilities for implementing your API requests. Take
a look at the [source code of solidus\_api](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api) to
see what's available!
:::

At this point, your request spec should be passing, meaning you can integrate it in your frontend
and allow users to like products!

## Extending existing resources

As a next step, we'll add a `likes_count` to the `Spree::Product` model and expose it in our API. In
order to do this, we first need to add the column to the `spree_products` table:

```bash
$ rails g migration AddLikesCountToSpreeProducts likes_count:integer
```

We will also need to make sure the `likes_count` column is automatically updated with the number of
users who have liked the product. In order to do this, we can use ActiveRecord's
excellent [counter cache feature](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/association_basics.html#options-for-belongs-to-counter-cache)
. Let's modify the `belongs_to :product` association by enabling the option:

```ruby
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  # ...
  belongs_to :product, class_name: 'Spree::Product', counter_cache: :likes_count
  # ...
end
```

ActiveRecord should now start keeping the number of likes in the `likes_count` column.

In order to expose this field to API clients, we'll need to add a JSON field to the products API. We
could just copy-paste the `product.json.jbuilder` view from Solidus and add the field there, but
then we would need to remember to update our custom view every time the original view is changed.

Instead, Solidus provides a more manageable way to add attributes to API resources via
the `ApiHelpers` module. Let's see how we can do it and test it:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Spree::Api::Config.product_attributes << :likes_count
```

That's all we need! We have created a new API resource and implemented a new endpoint to manipulate
it, and we have seen how to add fields to an existing API resource. If you feel adventurous, how
about trying to implement an endpoint for _removing_ an existing product like?

## How-to guides

- [How to sign in to the Solidus API using solidus_auth_devise][how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise]

[how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise]: ../how-tos/how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise.mdx

Commit message:

Add a How-To for adding attributes to existing resources via API

docs/customization/customizing-the-api.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 5
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Customizing the API

This guide will teach you how to customize Solidus' REST API.

## Introduction to the REST API

:::info

We also provide a GraphQL API, if you're more into
that. [Check it out!](https://github.com/solidusio-contrib/solidus_graphql_api)

:::

Solidus comes with a complete [REST API](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api) that
allows you to manage all aspects of your store. In some cases, you may want to extend the API's
functionality by adding new endpoints and customizing the existing ones. Like all other parts of
Solidus, the API is a Rails engine, which means you can use the regular tools at your disposal to
customize its behavior.

:::danger

The API is also used by the default Solidus backend to perform certain tasks without reloading the
page. If you are modifying an endpoint's input schema or heavily customizing its output, make sure
you are not accidentally breaking your backend! If in doubt, you can always create a new endpoint
for your purposes.

:::

In this guide, we'll see how to implement a quick-and-dirty API for customers to "like" a certain
product, so that you know which products customer like the most. We'll implement a new endpoint for
liking a product and we'll add a `likes_count` attribute to the
existing [products API](https://solidus.docs.stoplight.io/api-reference/products/list-products).

Let's get started!

## Designing your resources

First of all, we need to make sure users can somehow tell us that they like a product. Because we
want this to happen without users having to reload the page, we'll do it via the API.

We could just add a `likes_count` column to the `spree_products` table, but in our case we also want
to know which users liked which products, so that a product cannot be liked twice by the same user
and we can personalize the user's recommendations based on the products they liked. We will also
want to make sure that unauthenticated users cannot like a product, because we wouldn't be able to
associate that like to a specific customer.

Let's start by creating a new model, `ProductLike`, which we'll use to store the user-product
relationship:

```bash
$ rails g model ProductLike user:belongs_to product:belongs_to
```

We'll need to edit the model generated by this command to specify the full namespace of our
associated models:

```ruby title="app/models/product_like.rb"
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :product, class_name: 'Spree::Product'
  belongs_to :user, class_name: 'Spree::User'
end
```

We'll also have to edit the migration manually to specify the correct table names for the foreign
keys:

```ruby
class CreateProductLikes < ActiveRecord::Migration[6.0]
  def change
    create_table :product_likes do |t|
      t.integer :user_id, null: false
      t.integer :product_id, null: false

      t.foreign_key :spree_users, column: :user_id, on_delete: :cascade
      t.foreign_key :spree_products, column: :product_id, on_delete: :cascade

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Once we're done, we can run the migration with the usual command:

```bash
$ rails db:migrate
```

Finally, we will add a uniqueness validation to our model:

```ruby title="app/models/product_like.rb"
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  # ...
  validates :user, uniqueness: { scope: :product_id }
end
```

Now that we have our model in place, we're ready to start creating an API endpoint for liking
products!

## Creating a new endpoint

Implementing a new API endpoint is fairly simple: all we have to do is create a new controller along
with its actions, routes and views, just like we would do in a regular Rails application. For our
use case, we'll want to create a `ProductLikesController` with a `create` action that allows us to
like a product.

:::info
We could also add a `like` action to the existing `Spree::Api::ProductsController`. However, it's
recommended to follow RESTful resource naming when creating new API endpoints. This makes our API
easier to understand, consume and maintain.
:::

Let's create our controller first:

```ruby title="app/controllers/spree/api/product\_likes\_controller.rb"
module Spree
  module Api
    class ProductLikesController < Spree::Api::BaseController
      def create
        @product = find_product(params[:product_id])
        @like = ProductLike.new(product: @product, user: current_api_user)

        if @like.save
          render :show, status: :no_content
        else
          invalid_resource!(@like)
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

In our controller, we are relying on a few helpers Solidus provides out of the box:

* `find_product` retrieves a product by its numeric ID or slug.
* `current_api_user` retrieves the currently authenticated user \(by default, all API requests
require authentication\).
* `invalid_resource!` generates a 422 response that exposes all the error messages on an
ActiveModel-compliant object.

Now that we have the controller, let's also create the corresponding view:

```ruby title="app/views/spree/api/product\_likes/show.json.jbuilder"
json.user_id(@like.user_id)
json.partial!("spree/api/products/product", product: @like.product)
```

In the view, we are using [JBuilder](https://github.com/rails/jbuilder) to create a JSON
representation of our `ProductLike` instance. The user ID is represented as an integer, while the
product is transformed into a full JSON object by using Solidus' `_product.json.jbuilder` partial.

And finally, let's add a route to the controller action:

```ruby title="config/routes.rb"
# ...
Spree::Core::Engine.routes.draw do
  namespace :api, defaults: { format: 'json' } do
    resources :products do
      resource :product_like, only: :create
    end
  end
end
```

In the route, you may notice we are using a singleton resource \(`resource :product_like`\) rather
than a collection \(`resource :product_likes`\). This is because a user may only have one like for a
product. We are also limiting the routes for that resource to the `:create` action, since we are not
going to implement the others.

:::info
Solidus provides a lot more partials, helpers and utilities for implementing your API requests. Take
a look at the [source code of solidus\_api](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/tree/master/api) to
see what's available!
:::

At this point, your request spec should be passing, meaning you can integrate it in your frontend
and allow users to like products!

## Extending existing resources

As a next step, we'll add a `likes_count` to the `Spree::Product` model and expose it in our API. In
order to do this, we first need to add the column to the `spree_products` table:

```bash
$ rails g migration AddLikesCountToSpreeProducts likes_count:integer
```

We will also need to make sure the `likes_count` column is automatically updated with the number of
users who have liked the product. In order to do this, we can use ActiveRecord's
excellent [counter cache feature](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/association_basics.html#options-for-belongs-to-counter-cache)
. Let's modify the `belongs_to :product` association by enabling the option:

```ruby
class ProductLike < ApplicationRecord
  # ...
  belongs_to :product, class_name: 'Spree::Product', counter_cache: :likes_count
  # ...
end
```

ActiveRecord should now start keeping the number of likes in the `likes_count` column.

In order to expose this field to API clients, we'll need to add a JSON field to the products API:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Spree::Api::Config.product_attributes << :likes_count
```

:::info

For more information about how to extend the attributes of existing API resources, please refer to the
[Add attributes to existing resources][how-to-add-attributes-to-existing-resources] How-To.

:::

That's all we need! We have created a new API resource and implemented a new endpoint to manipulate
it, and we have seen how to add fields to an existing API resource. If you feel adventurous, how
about trying to implement an endpoint for _removing_ an existing product like?

## How-to guides

- [How to sign in to the Solidus API using solidus_auth_devise][how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise]
- [Add attributes to existing resources][how-to-add-attributes-to-existing-resources]

[how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise]: /how-tos/how-to-sign-in-to-the-solidus-api-using-solidus_auth_devise.mdx
[how-to-add-attributes-to-existing-resources]: /how-tos/api/add-attributes-to-existing-resources.mdx
