docs/customization/customizing-your-storefront.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Customizing your storefront

In this guide, we're going to show you an example of how to customize your storefront. In
particular, we're going to add a hero image to the hero section of the home page:

![Hero image placeholder](/img/customizing-your-storefront/hero-image-placeholder.png)

For the rest of the guide, we'll assume that you have a running Solidus application with
SolidusStarterFrontend as your storefront.

:::info

With Solidus 3.2, installing Solidus would automatically install [SolidusStarterFrontend][], which
is the new frontend solution for Solidus. As a Rails application template, it copies all the
Solidus frontend code directly to your Rails app. This makes the frontend code directly accessible
to your application. If you're familiar with customizing views and assets on a regular Rails app,
you already have the knowledge to customize the frontend of a Solidus application.

Before Solidus 3.2, we used to package the storefront as a Rails engine, called
[SolidusFrontend][]. In theory, this would allow users to upgrade their
storefront whenever there is a new update. However, we found that users rarely
did this, since they tended to heavily customize their storefronts.
Furthermore, packaging the storefront as a Rails engine made frontend
customization more difficult than necessary.

[SolidusFrontend]: https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_frontend

:::

## Editing a view

If we inspect the home page, we'll see that the hero container has the following HTML code:

```html
<div class="hero__container">
  <div class="hero__message">
    <h1 class="hero-title">
      The only eCommerce platform you’ll ever need.
    </h1>

    <p class="subtitle">
      Build, customize and scale your store with no limits or license fees.
      Solidus is the free, open-source eCommerce framework for
      digitally-native brands, fast-growing online businesses and pragmatic
      developers.
    </p>
  </div>
</div>
```

If we search for views with the CSS class `"hero__container"` in your Solidus app, we find
`app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb`. This partial was copied to your app during the installation
of SolidusStarterFrontend.

Let's use the [`image_tag`][image_tag] helper to try and add a placeholder for the hero image in
that partial:

```html
<div class="hero__container">
  <%= image_tag('hero-image') %>
  <div class="hero__message">
    ...
  </div>
</div>
```

If we test it out, we'll find that we need to add the hero image to the asset pipeline:

![Missing hero image error](/img/customizing-your-storefront/missing-hero-image-error.png)

## Running the frontend specs

If you try and run the [RSpec][] test suite at this point, you may also see some specs fail because
of this error:

```
$ bundle exec rspec spec/requests/spree/home_spec.rb

...

Failures:

  1) Home layout provides current user to the searcher class
     Failure/Error: <%= image_tag('hero-image') %>

     ActionView::Template::Error:
       The asset "hero-image" is not present in the asset pipeline.
     # ./app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb:3:in `_app_views_spree_home__hero_html_erb___8794442347239906_218740'
     # ./app/views/spree/home/index.html.erb:1:in `_app_views_spree_home_index_html_erb__1597336803422850061_218720'
     # ./spec/requests/spree/home_spec.rb:18:in `block (2 levels) in <top (required)>'
     # ------------------
     # --- Caused by: ---
     # Sprockets::Rails::Helper::AssetNotFound:
     #   The asset "hero-image" is not present in the asset pipeline.
     #   ./app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb:3:in `_app_views_spree_home__hero_html_erb___8794442347239906_218740'

...

```

When you installed SolidusStarterFrontend to your app, you also received some some specs for testing
the frontend. These specs are part of the SolidusStarterFrontend test suite itself, that is, they
are used in testing the SolidusStarterFrontend project. By copying these specs to your app, you get
a good starting test suite for testing your application.

## Adding an image

We'll be using this image as the hero image for the home page:

![Hero image](/img/customizing-your-storefront/hero-image.png)

Following the [Rails Assets Pipeline guide][], we're supposed to save this image in the
`app/assets/images` directory. Once we save the image there, the home page now looks like this:

![Home page with unstyled hero](/img/customizing-your-storefront/home-page-with-unstyled-hero.png)

As you can see, we'll need to update the stylesheets in order to move the image above the hero
message.

## Customizing a stylesheet

If we search for the word "hero" in the stylesheets of the app, we would find
`app/assets/stylesheets/spree/frontend/components/presentation/_hero.scss`:

```scss
.hero {
  background: $color-background-dark;
  color: $color-copy-bright;
  padding: 10rem 0;

  &__container {
    @extend %section-spacings;
    display: flex;
  }
}
```

Like the hero partial from earlier, this [Sass][] stylesheet was copied to the Rails app when SolidusStarterFrontend was installed on the app.

Let's update the stylesheet to

1. change the flex direction of the container to `column`, and
2. add a bottom margin to the hero image

```scss
.hero {
  // ...

  &__container {
    // ...
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: column;

    img {
      margin-bottom: 3rem;
    }
  }
}
```

With those changes, the hero section now looks much better:

![Home page with styled hero](/img/customizing-your-storefront/home-page-with-styled-hero.png)

## Summary

Since Solidus copies all of the starter frontend code to your app, modifying frontend views and
assets is straightforward. You're also provided an initial test suite to test drive your frontend
modifications.

[image_tag]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/AssetTagHelper.html#method-i-image_tag
[Rails Assets Pipeline guide]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html#coding-links-to-assets
[RSpec]: https://rspec.info
[Sass]: https://sass-lang.com
[SolidusStarterFrontend]: https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_starter_frontend

Commit message:

Replace "straightforward" with "similar to any other Rails app"

docs/customization/customizing-your-storefront.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Customizing your storefront

In this guide, we're going to show you an example of how to customize your storefront. In
particular, we're going to add a hero image to the hero section of the home page:

![Hero image placeholder](/img/customizing-your-storefront/hero-image-placeholder.png)

For the rest of the guide, we'll assume that you have a running Solidus application with
SolidusStarterFrontend as your storefront.

:::info

With Solidus 3.2, installing Solidus would automatically install [SolidusStarterFrontend][], which
is the new frontend solution for Solidus. As a Rails application template, it copies all the
Solidus frontend code directly to your Rails app. This makes the frontend code directly accessible
to your application. If you're familiar with customizing views and assets on a regular Rails app,
you already have the knowledge to customize the frontend of a Solidus application.

Before Solidus 3.2, we used to package the storefront as a Rails engine, called
[SolidusFrontend][]. In theory, this would allow users to upgrade their
storefront whenever there is a new update. However, we found that users rarely
did this, since they tended to heavily customize their storefronts.
Furthermore, packaging the storefront as a Rails engine made frontend
customization more difficult than necessary.

[SolidusFrontend]: https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_frontend

:::

## Editing a view

If we inspect the home page, we'll see that the hero container has the following HTML code:

```html
<div class="hero__container">
  <div class="hero__message">
    <h1 class="hero-title">
      The only eCommerce platform you’ll ever need.
    </h1>

    <p class="subtitle">
      Build, customize and scale your store with no limits or license fees.
      Solidus is the free, open-source eCommerce framework for
      digitally-native brands, fast-growing online businesses and pragmatic
      developers.
    </p>
  </div>
</div>
```

If we search for views with the CSS class `"hero__container"` in your Solidus app, we find
`app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb`. This partial was copied to your app during the installation
of SolidusStarterFrontend.

Let's use the [`image_tag`][image_tag] helper to try and add a placeholder for the hero image in
that partial:

```html
<div class="hero__container">
  <%= image_tag('hero-image') %>
  <div class="hero__message">
    ...
  </div>
</div>
```

If we test it out, we'll find that we need to add the hero image to the asset pipeline:

![Missing hero image error](/img/customizing-your-storefront/missing-hero-image-error.png)

## Running the frontend specs

If you try and run the [RSpec][] test suite at this point, you may also see some specs fail because
of this error:

```
$ bundle exec rspec spec/requests/spree/home_spec.rb

...

Failures:

  1) Home layout provides current user to the searcher class
     Failure/Error: <%= image_tag('hero-image') %>

     ActionView::Template::Error:
       The asset "hero-image" is not present in the asset pipeline.
     # ./app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb:3:in `_app_views_spree_home__hero_html_erb___8794442347239906_218740'
     # ./app/views/spree/home/index.html.erb:1:in `_app_views_spree_home_index_html_erb__1597336803422850061_218720'
     # ./spec/requests/spree/home_spec.rb:18:in `block (2 levels) in <top (required)>'
     # ------------------
     # --- Caused by: ---
     # Sprockets::Rails::Helper::AssetNotFound:
     #   The asset "hero-image" is not present in the asset pipeline.
     #   ./app/views/spree/home/_hero.html.erb:3:in `_app_views_spree_home__hero_html_erb___8794442347239906_218740'

...

```

When you installed SolidusStarterFrontend to your app, you also received some some specs for testing
the frontend. These specs are part of the SolidusStarterFrontend test suite itself, that is, they
are used in testing the SolidusStarterFrontend project. By copying these specs to your app, you get
a good starting test suite for testing your application.

## Adding an image

We'll be using this image as the hero image for the home page:

![Hero image](/img/customizing-your-storefront/hero-image.png)

Following the [Rails Assets Pipeline guide][], we're supposed to save this image in the
`app/assets/images` directory. Once we save the image there, the home page now looks like this:

![Home page with unstyled hero](/img/customizing-your-storefront/home-page-with-unstyled-hero.png)

As you can see, we'll need to update the stylesheets in order to move the image above the hero
message.

## Customizing a stylesheet

If we search for the word "hero" in the stylesheets of the app, we would find
`app/assets/stylesheets/spree/frontend/components/presentation/_hero.scss`:

```scss
.hero {
  background: $color-background-dark;
  color: $color-copy-bright;
  padding: 10rem 0;

  &__container {
    @extend %section-spacings;
    display: flex;
  }
}
```

Like the hero partial from earlier, this [Sass][] stylesheet was copied to the Rails app when SolidusStarterFrontend was installed on the app.

Let's update the stylesheet to

1. change the flex direction of the container to `column`, and
2. add a bottom margin to the hero image

```scss
.hero {
  // ...

  &__container {
    // ...
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: column;

    img {
      margin-bottom: 3rem;
    }
  }
}
```

With those changes, the hero section now looks much better:

![Home page with styled hero](/img/customizing-your-storefront/home-page-with-styled-hero.png)

## Summary

Since Solidus copies all of the starter frontend code to your app, modifying frontend views and
assets is similar to any other Rails application. You're also provided an initial test suite to
test drive your frontend modifications.

[image_tag]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/AssetTagHelper.html#method-i-image_tag
[Rails Assets Pipeline guide]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html#coding-links-to-assets
[RSpec]: https://rspec.info
[Sass]: https://sass-lang.com
[SolidusStarterFrontend]: https://github.com/solidusio/solidus_starter_frontend
