docs/customization/customizing-the-backend.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 4
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Customizing the backend

This guide will teach you how to customize the Solidus admin panel.

## Designing your feature

When adding a feature to the backend UI, it's important that you spend some time designing the ideal
UX for your store administrators. There are usually different ways to implement the same feature,
and the best approach depends on how store admins use the backend.

In this guide, we'll implement a very simple rejection system that allows you to mark certain email
addresses as rejected and require an admin to manually review and approve any orders placed with
that email address.

To simplify the implementation, we'll assume the rejected email addresses are stored in an
environment variable as a comma-separated string. Here are a couple of user stories we'll use as
reference for the feature's requirement:

* rejected orders are flagged automatically;
* admins can manually approve rejected orders;
* admins can list all rejected orders.

Without further ado, let's start writing some code!

## Adding new columns

The first step is to add the `rejected` column to the `spree_orders` table, which we'll use to
determine whether an order has been rejected. This is quite simple to do
with [a migration](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active\_record\_migrations.html):

```bash
$ rails g migration AddRejectedToSpreeOrders rejected:boolean
```

Edit the newly generated migration file so the new column can't be `NULL` and defaults to `false`.

```diff
<     add_column :spree_orders, :rejected, :boolean
---
>     add_column :spree_orders, :rejected, :boolean, null: false, default: false
```

Finally, update your database by running:

```bash
$ rails db:migrate
```

## Hooking into order events

The first step is to flag an order as rejected when the email address on the order has been
rejected. You can do this by creating a class whose job is to analyze an order and determine whether
it should be flagged as rejected:

```ruby title="app/models/amazing_store/order_analyzer.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

module AmazingStore
  class OrderAnalyzer
    def analyze(order)
      order.update!(rejected: order_rejected?(order))
    end

    private

    def rejected_emails
      ENV.fetch('REJECTED_EMAILS', '').split(',')
    end

    def order_rejected?(order)
      order.email.in?(rejected_emails)
    end
  end
end
```

You will then need to subscribe to the `order_finalized` event, which is fired when an order is
placed successfully, and call the analyzer:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree_bus.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Bus.subscribe :order_finalized do |event|
    AmazingStore::OrderAnalyzer.new.analyze(event.payload[:order])
  end
end
```

At this point, we have a dead-simple order analyzer that determines whether each new order should be
rejected or not. Now, we need to allow admins to manually review rejected orders and decide whether
to reject them or remove them from the rejected.

## Implementing new actions

In order to allow admins to remove an order from the rejected, we'll add a button to the order
detail page that will trigger a new controller action.

The first step is to add our custom action to `Spree::Admin::OrdersController`. We'll use an
override (see the [overrides section](customizing-the-core.mdx#using-overrides) for how to set it
up) to accomplish that:

```ruby title="app/overrides/amazing_store/spree/admin/orders_controller/add_remove_from_rejected_action.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

module AmazingStore
  module Spree
    module Admin
      module OrdersController
        module AddRemoveFromRejectedAction
          def remove_from_rejected
            load_order

            @order.update!(rejected: false)

            redirect_to edit_admin_order_path(@order)
          end

          ::Spree::Admin::OrdersController.prepend self
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

Now that the controller action has been implemented, we can define a route for it:

```ruby title="config/routes.rb"
# ...

Spree::Core::Engine.routes.draw do
  namespace :admin do
    resources :orders, only: [] do
      member do
        put :remove_from_rejected
      end
    end
  end
end
```

In the next section, we'll see how to hook our custom controller action to a new button in the
backend.

## Defacing admin views

We are going to add a "Remove from rejected" to the order toolbar:

![Deface example](./images/deface-example.png)

We are going to use the popular [Deface](https://github.com/spree/deface) gem to apply a patch to
the default view. In case you're not familiar with it, Deface is a gem that allows you to "
virtually" patch third-party views, meaning you can edit them without having to completely replace
them in your application.

:::info

Just like for the storefront, you can still copy-paste the backend views into your application if
you want to override them. However, this approach is quite hard to maintain, since it would prevent
you to get any Solidus upgrades to the backend for views that have been overridden. It becomes even
more complex when you consider all the different overrides applied to the backend by Solidus
extensions. Deface is a declarative, maintainable way of patching backend views while still
benefitting from Solidus upgrades.

:::

First of all, we need to install Deface by adding it to our `Gemfile`:

```ruby title="Gemfile"
# ...
gem 'deface'
```

Once done, we need to identify which view we want to customize. By browsing through the backend's
codebase, we can see the view in question is `spree/admin/orders/edit.html.erb`. If we inspect the
view's source code, we can also see that we want our button to be included in the content for
the `:page_actions` element, so that it's added to the toolbar actions when editing an order.

Equipped with this information, we can now write our Deface override:

```markup title="app/overrides/spree/admin/orders/edit/add_remove_from_rejected.html.erb.deface"
<!-- insert_before "erb[silent]:contains('if can?(:fire, @order)')" -->
<li>
  <% if @order.rejected? %>
    <%= button_to(
      t('spree.remove_from_rejected'),
      remove_from_rejected_admin_order_url(@order),
      method: :put,
      class: 'btn btn-primary btn-remove_order_from_rejected',
    ) %>
  <% end %>
</li>
```

:::warning

The path of overrides is extremely important: the directory where you put the override **must**
match the path of the view you want to customize (minus the extension), and the override **must**
have the `.html.erb.deface` extension for Deface to apply it correctly. If an override is not
getting applied, the first thing you look at should be the path.

:::

:::info

Deface provides a lot of selectors, actions and tools for debugging your overrides — taking the time
to understand how to use them correctly will help you a lot when overriding different parts of the
backend. You can look at the [Deface documentation](https://github.com/spree/deface) and even at
Solidus extensions if you need some inspiration with a tricky override.

:::

The last thing we need to do for our button to appear properly is add
the `spree.remove_from_rejected` translation key to our application. We just need to add the key to
the `config/locales/en.yml` file in our application, like this:

```yaml title="config/locales/en.yml"
en:
  spree:
    remove_from_rejected: Remove from rejected
```

:::info

While it's also possible to hardcode the string in your views/controllers, using Rails' native
internationalization features will allow you to write code that is easier to maintain and will make
it easier to go global, should you ever need it.

:::

:::info

You can override default Spree translations in the exact same way, if you want to change the default
labels or messages in the backend.

:::

## Adding new search form fields

The last point of our feature requires that users can list all the orders that are rejected. The
most straightforward solution is adding a field to the orders' search form for our new `:rejected`
attribute.

:::info

Search forms in Solidus use the [ransack](https://github.com/activerecord-hackery/ransack) gem under
the hood. Please, see its documentation for a complete description of everything that is supported.

:::

The orders' search form is visible from the "Orders" menu item. We've already
seen [how to override views with Deface](customizing-the-backend.mdx#defacing-admin-views). This time
we need to override the index template for orders:

```erb title="app/overrides/spree/admin/orders/index/add_rejected_filter.html.erb.deface"
<!-- insert_bottom "[data-hook=admin_orders_index_search] .field-block" -->
<div class="field">
  <%= label_tag :q_rejected_eq, t('spree.rejected') %>
  <%= f.select :rejected_eq, [[t('spree.say_yes'), true], [t('spree.say_no'), false]], include_blank: t('spree.all') %>
</div>
```

The new field is already visible. However, for security reasons, you're still required to explicitly
include the new attribute to the list of allowed queryable columns:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Order.whitelisted_ransackable_attributes |= ['rejected']
end
```

After restarting the server, you can try it out and confirm it's working as expected!

## Adding new menu items

If you wanted to give maximum prominence to the problem with rejected orders, you could consider
adding a new item to the main admin menu. You can do that by creating a
new [`Spree::BackendConfiguration::MenuItem`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/df51df62fa9b829216958b21b20514b7a3d87b30/backend/lib/spree/backend\_configuration.rb#L37)
instance:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Spree::Backend::Config.configure do |config|
  # ...
  config.menu_items << config.class::MenuItem.new(
    label: :rejected_orders,
    icon: 'ban',
    url: '/admin/orders?q[rejected_eq]=true',
  )
end
```

Our new `:rejected_orders` menu item points to the same URL generated when only
the [previously introduced filter](customizing-the-backend.mdx#adding-new-search-form-fields) is
selected in the search form. We use [`ban`](https://fontawesome.com/search?q=ban\&s=solid%2Cbrands)
as its [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com) icon and want its position to be the first one.

:::info

The `position` argument is always considered after the "Order" menu item, which will always be on
the very top of the sidebar. Therefore, the `:rejected_orders` item will be second in our example.

:::

Finally, we need to add the translation so its label is rendered:

```yaml title="config/locales/en.yml"
# ...
en:
  spree:
    admin:
      tab:
        rejected_orders: Rejected orders
```

After restarting again your server, you can see how everything is in place.

There're other interesting options that you can give on the initialization of a menu item:

* `condition:` can contain a `Proc` for when the menu item should be displayed. For instance, if we
only wanted our example to be rendered when there's at least one rejected order, we could
pass `condition: -> { Spree::Order.where(rejected: true).any? }`.
* `match_path:` allows more flexibility to match the current URL and render the custom item as being
active in the menu. For instance, we might want to have our example highlighted whenever the
filter has been selected, regardless of other filters being
applied: `match_path: %r{[rejected_eq]=true}`.
* `label:` allows changing the key under `{lang}.spree.admin.tab` where the label translation can be
found in the locale file.
* `partial:` can be used in complex scenarios when you want a partial to be rendered as content
within your menu item. For instance, `partial: 'spree/admin/orders/rejected_orders'`.

## Customizing assets

Solidus leverages the [Rails asset
pipeline](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html) to allow for
customization and overriding of your backend assets. We recommend that you
familiarize yourself with the Rails asset pipeline before going any further.

Some aspects of the style in the backend have been extracted into SCSS
variables. You can look at them in the [`spree/backend/globals/_variables.scss`
file](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/backend/app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/globals/_variables.scss).
If you want to redefine some of them, you can create a
`spree/backend/globals/_variables_override.scss` file under your application
stylesheets directory. For instance, if you wanted to make the header black:

```scss title="app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/globals/_variables_override.scss"
$color-header-bg: #000;
```

For more elaborated changes, take into account that, when you install Solidus,
the two following manifest files are created:

* `vendor/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/all.css`, for your CSS assets.
* `vendor/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/all.js`, for your Javascript assets.

If you glance at them, you'll see that they both include a `spree/backend`
file, which is located in the Solidus' backend Rails engine, and, after that,
they also require all the files recursively under their directories (the
`require_tree .` directive). Any file you put under
`vendor/assets/{stylesheets,javascripts}/spree/backend` directories will be
loaded after Solidus' default assets, allowing you not only to customize but to
override CSS and Javascript code.

:::warning

If you can, always go for adding instead of overriding default assets. There's
no guarantee that a Solidus style won't change in the future and make your
override useless or behave in unexpected ways.

:::

Nonetheless, you might want to put the assets you control under `app/assets`,
just like Sprockets recommends. For that, you need to add another directive to
the generated manifest, as we'll demonstrate below.

:::danger

When dropping a file under `app/assets`, you must be careful. By default, the
generated manifests under
`app/assets/{stylesheets,javascript}/application.{css,js}` in a new Rails
application contain directives to load any file below their hierarchy
recursively. I.e., a style meant only to be used in the backend could interfere
with your storefront. Make sure you update the generated manifests accordingly,
including the removal of the `require_tree .` directive.

:::

As a simple example, let's make the delete button a bit more prominent by
uppercasing its label. We'll require another file from the Solidus CSS
manifest at `vendor/stylesheets/spree/backend/all.css`

```diff
  *= require spree/backend
  *= require_self
  *= require_tree .
+ *= require spree/backend/custom
 */
```

We'll place it within the `app/assets/stylesheets` directory:

```css title="app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/custom.css"
.btn-remove_order_from_rejected {
  text-transform: uppercase;
}
```

Pretty much the same when it comes to Javascript. In this case, we'd need to
modify the `vendor/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/all.js` manifest.

```diff
 //= require rails-ujs
 //= require spree/backend
 //= require_tree .
+//= require spree/backend/custom
```

We could then put any new behavior in the expected file:

```javascript title="app/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/custom.js"
// Javascript code
```

## Taking it from here

Congratulations! You have implemented your first custom feature for the Solidus backend.

Of course, we have just scratched the surface of what's possible: the backend provides a lot of UI
components and capabilities you may leverage. We suggest spending some time in the backend's
codebase to get accustomed with all the different tools at your disposal, and doing some
planning/research before every custom feature.

By using a combination of custom controller actions, view overrides and automated tests, you'll be
able to write custom admin features that are fully integrated with the Solidus experience, and yet
are a joy to maintain and evolve over time.

Commit message:

Mention dual-admin transitory peroid to avoid onboarding confusion

docs/customization/customizing-the-backend.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 4
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Customizing the backend

This guide will teach you how to customize the Solidus admin panel.

## Transitioning from Spree::Admin to SolidusAdmin

Please note that currently there are two different admin engines running in parallel:

1. `solidus_backend` as required by default from the `solidus` gem, under the namespace `Spree::Admin`
2. `solidus_admin` as installed by default for new stores since solidus v4.3 and uses the namespace `SolidusAdmin`

SolidusAdmin routes have preference over Spree::Admin if the following conditions are met:

1. The `Show Legacy UI` button is switched off at the bottom of the admin sidebar
2. The resource's action is implemented in SolidusAdmin
3. The routes are drawn and not excluded by the `SolidusAdmin::Config['enable_alpha_features']` flag

During this transitory period make sure you follow instructions that matches the actual admin engine being 
used for the particular resource.

## Designing your feature

When adding a feature to the backend UI, it's important that you spend some time designing the ideal
UX for your store administrators. There are usually different ways to implement the same feature,
and the best approach depends on how store admins use the backend.

In this guide, we'll implement a very simple rejection system that allows you to mark certain email
addresses as rejected and require an admin to manually review and approve any orders placed with
that email address.

To simplify the implementation, we'll assume the rejected email addresses are stored in an
environment variable as a comma-separated string. Here are a couple of user stories we'll use as
reference for the feature's requirement:

* rejected orders are flagged automatically;
* admins can manually approve rejected orders;
* admins can list all rejected orders.

Without further ado, let's start writing some code!

## Adding new columns

The first step is to add the `rejected` column to the `spree_orders` table, which we'll use to
determine whether an order has been rejected. This is quite simple to do
with [a migration](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active\_record\_migrations.html):

```bash
$ rails g migration AddRejectedToSpreeOrders rejected:boolean
```

Edit the newly generated migration file so the new column can't be `NULL` and defaults to `false`.

```diff
<     add_column :spree_orders, :rejected, :boolean
---
>     add_column :spree_orders, :rejected, :boolean, null: false, default: false
```

Finally, update your database by running:

```bash
$ rails db:migrate
```

## Hooking into order events

The first step is to flag an order as rejected when the email address on the order has been
rejected. You can do this by creating a class whose job is to analyze an order and determine whether
it should be flagged as rejected:

```ruby title="app/models/amazing_store/order_analyzer.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

module AmazingStore
  class OrderAnalyzer
    def analyze(order)
      order.update!(rejected: order_rejected?(order))
    end

    private

    def rejected_emails
      ENV.fetch('REJECTED_EMAILS', '').split(',')
    end

    def order_rejected?(order)
      order.email.in?(rejected_emails)
    end
  end
end
```

You will then need to subscribe to the `order_finalized` event, which is fired when an order is
placed successfully, and call the analyzer:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree_bus.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Bus.subscribe :order_finalized do |event|
    AmazingStore::OrderAnalyzer.new.analyze(event.payload[:order])
  end
end
```

At this point, we have a dead-simple order analyzer that determines whether each new order should be
rejected or not. Now, we need to allow admins to manually review rejected orders and decide whether
to reject them or remove them from the rejected.

## Implementing new actions

In order to allow admins to remove an order from the rejected, we'll add a button to the order
detail page that will trigger a new controller action.

The first step is to add our custom action to `Spree::Admin::OrdersController`. We'll use an
override (see the [overrides section](customizing-the-core.mdx#using-overrides) for how to set it
up) to accomplish that:

```ruby title="app/overrides/amazing_store/spree/admin/orders_controller/add_remove_from_rejected_action.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

module AmazingStore
  module Spree
    module Admin
      module OrdersController
        module AddRemoveFromRejectedAction
          def remove_from_rejected
            load_order

            @order.update!(rejected: false)

            redirect_to edit_admin_order_path(@order)
          end

          ::Spree::Admin::OrdersController.prepend self
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

Now that the controller action has been implemented, we can define a route for it:

```ruby title="config/routes.rb"
# ...

Spree::Core::Engine.routes.draw do
  namespace :admin do
    resources :orders, only: [] do
      member do
        put :remove_from_rejected
      end
    end
  end
end
```

In the next section, we'll see how to hook our custom controller action to a new button in the
backend.

## Defacing admin views

We are going to add a "Remove from rejected" to the order toolbar:

![Deface example](./images/deface-example.png)

We are going to use the popular [Deface](https://github.com/spree/deface) gem to apply a patch to
the default view. In case you're not familiar with it, Deface is a gem that allows you to "
virtually" patch third-party views, meaning you can edit them without having to completely replace
them in your application.

:::info

Just like for the storefront, you can still copy-paste the backend views into your application if
you want to override them. However, this approach is quite hard to maintain, since it would prevent
you to get any Solidus upgrades to the backend for views that have been overridden. It becomes even
more complex when you consider all the different overrides applied to the backend by Solidus
extensions. Deface is a declarative, maintainable way of patching backend views while still
benefitting from Solidus upgrades.

:::

First of all, we need to install Deface by adding it to our `Gemfile`:

```ruby title="Gemfile"
# ...
gem 'deface'
```

Once done, we need to identify which view we want to customize. By browsing through the backend's
codebase, we can see the view in question is `spree/admin/orders/edit.html.erb`. If we inspect the
view's source code, we can also see that we want our button to be included in the content for
the `:page_actions` element, so that it's added to the toolbar actions when editing an order.

Equipped with this information, we can now write our Deface override:

```markup title="app/overrides/spree/admin/orders/edit/add_remove_from_rejected.html.erb.deface"
<!-- insert_before "erb[silent]:contains('if can?(:fire, @order)')" -->
<li>
  <% if @order.rejected? %>
    <%= button_to(
      t('spree.remove_from_rejected'),
      remove_from_rejected_admin_order_url(@order),
      method: :put,
      class: 'btn btn-primary btn-remove_order_from_rejected',
    ) %>
  <% end %>
</li>
```

:::warning

The path of overrides is extremely important: the directory where you put the override **must**
match the path of the view you want to customize (minus the extension), and the override **must**
have the `.html.erb.deface` extension for Deface to apply it correctly. If an override is not
getting applied, the first thing you look at should be the path.

:::

:::info

Deface provides a lot of selectors, actions and tools for debugging your overrides — taking the time
to understand how to use them correctly will help you a lot when overriding different parts of the
backend. You can look at the [Deface documentation](https://github.com/spree/deface) and even at
Solidus extensions if you need some inspiration with a tricky override.

:::

The last thing we need to do for our button to appear properly is add
the `spree.remove_from_rejected` translation key to our application. We just need to add the key to
the `config/locales/en.yml` file in our application, like this:

```yaml title="config/locales/en.yml"
en:
  spree:
    remove_from_rejected: Remove from rejected
```

:::info

While it's also possible to hardcode the string in your views/controllers, using Rails' native
internationalization features will allow you to write code that is easier to maintain and will make
it easier to go global, should you ever need it.

:::

:::info

You can override default Spree translations in the exact same way, if you want to change the default
labels or messages in the backend.

:::

## Adding new search form fields

The last point of our feature requires that users can list all the orders that are rejected. The
most straightforward solution is adding a field to the orders' search form for our new `:rejected`
attribute.

:::info

Search forms in Solidus use the [ransack](https://github.com/activerecord-hackery/ransack) gem under
the hood. Please, see its documentation for a complete description of everything that is supported.

:::

The orders' search form is visible from the "Orders" menu item. We've already
seen [how to override views with Deface](customizing-the-backend.mdx#defacing-admin-views). This time
we need to override the index template for orders:

```erb title="app/overrides/spree/admin/orders/index/add_rejected_filter.html.erb.deface"
<!-- insert_bottom "[data-hook=admin_orders_index_search] .field-block" -->
<div class="field">
  <%= label_tag :q_rejected_eq, t('spree.rejected') %>
  <%= f.select :rejected_eq, [[t('spree.say_yes'), true], [t('spree.say_no'), false]], include_blank: t('spree.all') %>
</div>
```

The new field is already visible. However, for security reasons, you're still required to explicitly
include the new attribute to the list of allowed queryable columns:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Order.whitelisted_ransackable_attributes |= ['rejected']
end
```

After restarting the server, you can try it out and confirm it's working as expected!

## Adding new menu items

If you wanted to give maximum prominence to the problem with rejected orders, you could consider
adding a new item to the main admin menu. You can do that by creating a
new [`Spree::BackendConfiguration::MenuItem`](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/df51df62fa9b829216958b21b20514b7a3d87b30/backend/lib/spree/backend\_configuration.rb#L37)
instance:

```ruby title="config/initializers/spree.rb"
# ...
Spree::Backend::Config.configure do |config|
  # ...
  config.menu_items << config.class::MenuItem.new(
    label: :rejected_orders,
    icon: 'ban',
    url: '/admin/orders?q[rejected_eq]=true',
  )
end
```

Our new `:rejected_orders` menu item points to the same URL generated when only
the [previously introduced filter](customizing-the-backend.mdx#adding-new-search-form-fields) is
selected in the search form. We use [`ban`](https://fontawesome.com/search?q=ban\&s=solid%2Cbrands)
as its [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com) icon and want its position to be the first one.

:::info

The `position` argument is always considered after the "Order" menu item, which will always be on
the very top of the sidebar. Therefore, the `:rejected_orders` item will be second in our example.

:::

Finally, we need to add the translation so its label is rendered:

```yaml title="config/locales/en.yml"
# ...
en:
  spree:
    admin:
      tab:
        rejected_orders: Rejected orders
```

After restarting again your server, you can see how everything is in place.

There're other interesting options that you can give on the initialization of a menu item:

* `condition:` can contain a `Proc` for when the menu item should be displayed. For instance, if we
only wanted our example to be rendered when there's at least one rejected order, we could
pass `condition: -> { Spree::Order.where(rejected: true).any? }`.
* `match_path:` allows more flexibility to match the current URL and render the custom item as being
active in the menu. For instance, we might want to have our example highlighted whenever the
filter has been selected, regardless of other filters being
applied: `match_path: %r{[rejected_eq]=true}`.
* `label:` allows changing the key under `{lang}.spree.admin.tab` where the label translation can be
found in the locale file.
* `partial:` can be used in complex scenarios when you want a partial to be rendered as content
within your menu item. For instance, `partial: 'spree/admin/orders/rejected_orders'`.

## Customizing assets

Solidus leverages the [Rails asset
pipeline](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html) to allow for
customization and overriding of your backend assets. We recommend that you
familiarize yourself with the Rails asset pipeline before going any further.

Some aspects of the style in the backend have been extracted into SCSS
variables. You can look at them in the [`spree/backend/globals/_variables.scss`
file](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/master/backend/app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/globals/_variables.scss).
If you want to redefine some of them, you can create a
`spree/backend/globals/_variables_override.scss` file under your application
stylesheets directory. For instance, if you wanted to make the header black:

```scss title="app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/globals/_variables_override.scss"
$color-header-bg: #000;
```

For more elaborated changes, take into account that, when you install Solidus,
the two following manifest files are created:

* `vendor/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/all.css`, for your CSS assets.
* `vendor/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/all.js`, for your Javascript assets.

If you glance at them, you'll see that they both include a `spree/backend`
file, which is located in the Solidus' backend Rails engine, and, after that,
they also require all the files recursively under their directories (the
`require_tree .` directive). Any file you put under
`vendor/assets/{stylesheets,javascripts}/spree/backend` directories will be
loaded after Solidus' default assets, allowing you not only to customize but to
override CSS and Javascript code.

:::warning

If you can, always go for adding instead of overriding default assets. There's
no guarantee that a Solidus style won't change in the future and make your
override useless or behave in unexpected ways.

:::

Nonetheless, you might want to put the assets you control under `app/assets`,
just like Sprockets recommends. For that, you need to add another directive to
the generated manifest, as we'll demonstrate below.

:::danger

When dropping a file under `app/assets`, you must be careful. By default, the
generated manifests under
`app/assets/{stylesheets,javascript}/application.{css,js}` in a new Rails
application contain directives to load any file below their hierarchy
recursively. I.e., a style meant only to be used in the backend could interfere
with your storefront. Make sure you update the generated manifests accordingly,
including the removal of the `require_tree .` directive.

:::

As a simple example, let's make the delete button a bit more prominent by
uppercasing its label. We'll require another file from the Solidus CSS
manifest at `vendor/stylesheets/spree/backend/all.css`

```diff
  *= require spree/backend
  *= require_self
  *= require_tree .
+ *= require spree/backend/custom
 */
```

We'll place it within the `app/assets/stylesheets` directory:

```css title="app/assets/stylesheets/spree/backend/custom.css"
.btn-remove_order_from_rejected {
  text-transform: uppercase;
}
```

Pretty much the same when it comes to Javascript. In this case, we'd need to
modify the `vendor/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/all.js` manifest.

```diff
 //= require rails-ujs
 //= require spree/backend
 //= require_tree .
+//= require spree/backend/custom
```

We could then put any new behavior in the expected file:

```javascript title="app/assets/javascripts/spree/backend/custom.js"
// Javascript code
```

## Taking it from here

Congratulations! You have implemented your first custom feature for the Solidus backend.

Of course, we have just scratched the surface of what's possible: the backend provides a lot of UI
components and capabilities you may leverage. We suggest spending some time in the backend's
codebase to get accustomed with all the different tools at your disposal, and doing some
planning/research before every custom feature.

By using a combination of custom controller actions, view overrides and automated tests, you'll be
able to write custom admin features that are fully integrated with the Solidus experience, and yet
are a joy to maintain and evolve over time.
