docs/customization/subscribing-to-events.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 3
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Subscribing to events

Solidus comes with a publish-subscribe system courtesy
of [Omnes](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) (a pub/sub library for Ruby). It allows applications to
hook into Solidus events (like completing an order) and extend the associated behavior.

:::info

You can run `Spree::Bus.registry.event_names`to get the list of available events.

:::

### Use cases

The Event Bus should not be seen as a way to add behavior to the domain model that published the
event. With that, we mean that subscribers' logic should be independent of the business flow that
triggered them.

For instance, take the `:order_finalized` event as an example. Collecting stats or sending a
confirmation SMS to the user would be good candidates for subscribers. However, if you need to
perform some logic that could prevent an order from being marked as completed, like checking some
conditions about the user, that should not be a subscriber. Instead, you should look at other
options to [customize the Solidus core](customizing-the-core.mdx).

The reason is a direct consequence of the decoupling the Event Bus provides. That's something good,
as it makes the upstream publisher independent of its subscribers' interface. However, it also
introduces indirection, and you don't want to jump from subscriber to subscriber to know why
something in the core transaction didn't work as expected. Think of what happens if your subscribers
spawn an async process; you don't want the main flow to wait for them before completing or fail if
they do.

### Subscription to events

Imagine you want to send an SMS whenever an order is completed. Luckily, Solidus emits an event
called `:order_finalized` when that happens.

To hook into that event, you can create an Omnes subscriber:&#x20;

```ruby title="app/subscribers/my_store/sms_subscriber.rb"
module MyStore
  class SmsSubscriber
    include Omnes::Subscriber

    handle :order_finalized,
           with: :notify_order_completed,
           id: :sms_notify_order_completed

    def notify_order_completed(event)
      order = event.payload[:order]
      SmsService.new.notify_order_completed(order)
    end
  end
end
```

There're other possible ways to create subscriptions with Omnes. You can, for instance, subscribe to
all events or run subscriptions asynchronously. Check its [README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes)
for details.

You still need to subscribe to the Solidus event bus, globally accessible as the `Spree::Bus`
constant. To activate subscriptions on load and refresh them on reload, wrap the code within
a [`#to_prepare`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Reloader.html#method-c-to\_prepare)
call in a Rails initializer:&#x20;

```ruby title="config/initializers/omnes.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  MyStore::SmsSubscriber.new.subscribe_to(Spree::Bus)
end
```

:::warning

Unlike in other Omnes buses you might want to create, be sure not to call `Spree::Bus.clear` on
the `#to_prepare` block. `Spree::Bus` is owned by the Solidus engine, which is already taking care
of cleaning it before code reload. If you clean it again, you'll lose Solidus defined events and
subscriptions.

:::

### Custom events

You're free to register your custom events into `Spree::Bus`. However, it's a good practice if you
namespace them so that you won't conflict with new events added in the future to core Solidus:

```ruby
Spree::Bus.register(:my_app_custom_event)
```

### Testing events

The Event Bus on Solidus is a global bus. That means you might need a way to temporarily disable it
except for the subscriber you want to test. The `.performing_only` method can be used to only listen
to a given subscription for the duration of a block.

```ruby title="spec/subscribers/my_store/sms_notification_subscriber_spec.rb"
require 'rails_helper'

RSpec.describe MyStore::SmsNotificationSubscriber do
  let(:sms_queue) { SmsService.test_queue }
  let(:subscription) { Spree::Bus.subscription(:sms_notify_order_completed) }

  it 'sends an SMS when an order is finalized' do
    order = create(:order)

    Spree::Bus.performing_only(subscription) do
      Spree::Bus.publish(:order_finalized, order: order)
    end

    expect(sms_queue.count).to be(1)
  end
end
```

#### Stubbing events

Solidus also comes with stub helpers to make it straightforward to test that an event has been
fired.

To begin with, you need to include the `Spree::TestingSupport::BusHelpers` in your test file. After
that, you need to call the `stub_spree_bus` method before asserting that a given event was
published.

```ruby title="spec/services/my_store/custom_service_spec.rb"
require 'rails_helper'
require 'spree/testing_support/bus_helpers'

RSpec.describe MyStore::CustomService do
  include Spree::TestingSupport::BusHelpers

  describe 'call' do
    it 'fires custom event' do
      stub_spree_bus
      order = create(:order)

      described_class.new.call(order)

      expect(:custom_event).to have_been_published
    end
  end
end
```

You can also assert the published payload using the `with` modifier.

```ruby title="spec/services/my_store/custom_service_spec.rb"
# ...
expect(:custom_event).to have_been_published.with(
  a_hash_including(order: order)
)
# ...
```

### Observing events

One of the tricky parts of event-driven design is that it's sometimes challenging to inspect the
flow of the program. Think of debugging, logging, and so on. Omnes comes with a lot of facilities
for observability.

Besides the published event, subscriptions can take a second argument to access the line of code
that published the event and when that happened.

```ruby
Spree::Bus.subscribe(:order_finalized) do |_event, context|
  puts context.time
  puts context.caller_location
end
# 2022-01-01 00:00:00 UTC
# /path/to/file/that/published/the/event:99:in `<main>'
```

There's much more to that. Check [Omnes' README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) for details.

### Upgrading from the legacy event system

[Omnes](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) is the default way to go for event-driven behavior since
Solidus v3.2. However, before that, a custom event system based
on [ActiveSupport::Notifications](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Notifications.html)
was in place. You might need to update your code if you're upgrading from Soldius v3.1 or before.

Once you run the [update generator](/upgrading-solidus/index.mdx#updating-preferences),
you'll have an option `config.use_legacy_events` commented out
in `config/initializers/new_solidus_defaults.rb`. Don't activate it until you've gone through all
the following points. However, you're good to go if your application is not using events for
anything (not subscribing to Solidus events or using custom ones). In that case, you can disable
legacy events straight away and stop reading now.

#### Subscriber modules

* Switch from a subscriber module to an Omnes subscriber. Be sure that event names are given as
a `Symbol`:

```ruby title="app/subscribers/my_subscriber.rb"
# Instead of
module MySubscriber
  event_action :do_something, event_name: :order_finalized
  event_action :order_recalculated

  def do_something(event)
   # ...
  end

  def order_recalculated(event)
    # ...
  end
end
# do
class MySubscriber
  include Omnes::Subscriber

  handle :order_finalized, with: :do_something
  handle :order_recalculated, with: :order_recalculated

  def do_something(event)
   # ...
  end

  def order_recalculated(event)
    # ...
  end
end
```

* Subscribe Omnes subscribers to `Spree::Bus` in an initializer:

```ruby title="config/initializers/omnes.rb"
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  MySubscriber.new.subscribe_to(Spree::Bus)
end
```

#### Block subscriptions

* Rename references from `Spree::Event` to `Spree::Bus`.&#x20;
* Make sure that you subscribe to the event name as a `Symbol`.

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe('order_finalized') {}
# do
Spree::Bus.subscribe(:order_finalized) {}
```

#### Regular expression subscriptions

Regular expression subscriptions are not supported on Omnes by default. They're considered an
anti-pattern, as you could unintentionally subscribe to new events added in the future if their
names match your pattern (e.g., you subscribe to `/order/` and a new event `stock_backordered` is
added).

The chances are that if you're using regular expression subscriptions, your use case is subscribing
to all events regardless of their nature (probably for logging purposes). In that case, you can lean
on Omnes's `#subscribe_to_all` method (or `handle_all` for subscriber classes):

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe /.*\.spree$/ do |event|
  # do_something
end
# do
Spree::Bus.subscribe_to_all do |event|
  # do_something
end
```

If you do want to use a regular expression for subscriptions, you can still use a custom Omnes
matcher with `#subscribe_with_matcher` (or `handle_with_matcher` in a subscriber class):

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe /order_/ do |event|
  # do_something
end
# do
ORDER_EVENTS_MATCHER = ->(event) { event.omnes_event_name.match?(/order_/) }
Spree::Bus.subscribe_with_matcher(ORDER_EVENTS_MATCHER) do |event|
  # do_something
end
```

#### Publishing events

* Rename `Spree::Event.fire` to `Spree::Bus.publish`.
* Giving a block at publication time is no longer supported. It provided no value, plus its
execution time (before vs. after subscriptions) was confusing:

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.fire(:my_store_custom_event, order_id: order.id) do
  do_something
end
# do
do_something
Spree::Bus.publish(:my_store_custom_event, order_id: order.id)
```

* Make sure that the published event name is a `Symbol`.
* Register that event in an initializer within
a [#to\_prepare](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Reloader.html#method-c-to\_prepare)
block:

```ruby title="config/initializer/omnes.rb"
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Bus.register(:my_store_custom_event)
end
```

#### Updating extensions

If you're maintaining an extension that needs to support both the legacy and the new event bus
systems, you can leverage
the [compatibility layer shipped with solidus\_support v0.9](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus\_support/blob/ba3c7d00f2da26f5bf5df54201697fa30c1ac60d/lib/solidus\_support/legacy\_event\_compat.rb)
. Please, check it for details.

:::success

There're many more features supported by Omnes that were not possible with the legacy system, like
async subscriptions, event instances, or the autodiscovery of event handlers from subscribers. This
guide covered the bare minimum to update your store. Please, check
its [README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) to extract all the potential that Omnes brings.

:::

Commit message:

Add docs for configurable event subscribers
Paired with new feature merged in solidusio/solidus#6234.

docs/customization/subscribing-to-events.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 3
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Subscribing to events

Solidus comes with a publish-subscribe system courtesy
of [Omnes](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) (a pub/sub library for Ruby). It allows applications to
hook into Solidus events (like completing an order) and extend the associated behavior.

:::info

You can run `Spree::Bus.registry.event_names`to get the list of available events.

:::

### Use cases

The Event Bus should not be seen as a way to add behavior to the domain model that published the
event. With that, we mean that subscribers' logic should be independent of the business flow that
triggered them.

For instance, take the `:order_finalized` event as an example. Collecting stats or sending a
confirmation SMS to the user would be good candidates for subscribers. However, if you need to
perform some logic that could prevent an order from being marked as completed, like checking some
conditions about the user, that should not be a subscriber. Instead, you should look at other
options to [customize the Solidus core](customizing-the-core.mdx).

The reason is a direct consequence of the decoupling the Event Bus provides. That's something good,
as it makes the upstream publisher independent of its subscribers' interface. However, it also
introduces indirection, and you don't want to jump from subscriber to subscriber to know why
something in the core transaction didn't work as expected. Think of what happens if your subscribers
spawn an async process; you don't want the main flow to wait for them before completing or fail if
they do.

### Subscription to events

Imagine you want to send an SMS whenever an order is completed. Luckily, Solidus emits an event
called `:order_finalized` when that happens.

To hook into that event, you can create an Omnes subscriber:&#x20;

```ruby title="app/subscribers/my_store/sms_subscriber.rb"
module MyStore
  class SmsSubscriber
    include Omnes::Subscriber

    handle :order_finalized,
           with: :notify_order_completed,
           id: :sms_notify_order_completed

    def notify_order_completed(event)
      order = event.payload[:order]
      SmsService.new.notify_order_completed(order)
    end
  end
end
```

There're other possible ways to create subscriptions with Omnes. You can, for instance, subscribe to
all events or run subscriptions asynchronously. Check its [README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes)
for details.

You still need to subscribe to the Solidus event bus, globally accessible as the `Spree::Bus`
constant. To activate subscriptions on load and refresh them on reload, wrap the code within
a [`#to_prepare`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Reloader.html#method-c-to\_prepare)
call in a Rails initializer:&#x20;

```ruby title="config/initializers/omnes.rb"
# frozen_string_literal: true

Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  MyStore::SmsSubscriber.new.subscribe_to(Spree::Bus)
end
```

:::warning

Unlike in other Omnes buses you might want to create, be sure not to call `Spree::Bus.clear` on
the `#to_prepare` block. `Spree::Bus` is owned by the Solidus engine, which is already taking care
of cleaning it before code reload. If you clean it again, you'll lose Solidus defined events and
subscriptions.

:::

### Built-in event subscribers

Solidus comes with built-in event subscribers for some event-driven functionality in the system. For
example, all transactional emails are initiated through event subscribers.

When the `solidus_core` engine is loaded, all of the built-in event subscribers are loaded from
`Spree::Config.environment.subscribers`. If you wanted to exclude some of the built-in subscribers
you could do so from an initializer in your application:

```ruby
# config/initializers/spree.rb

Spree.config do |config|
  config.environment.subscribers = [
    "Spree::OrderCancelMailerSubscriber",
    "Spree::OrderConfirmationMailerSubscriber",
    "Spree::OrderInventoryCancellationMailerSubscriber"
  ]
end
```

See `Spree::AppConfiguration` for an up-to-date list of Solidus' built-in subscribers.

### Custom events

You're free to register your custom events into `Spree::Bus`. However, it's a good practice if you
namespace them so that you won't conflict with new events added in the future to core Solidus:

```ruby
Spree::Bus.register(:my_app_custom_event)
```

### Testing events

The Event Bus on Solidus is a global bus. That means you might need a way to temporarily disable it
except for the subscriber you want to test. The `.performing_only` method can be used to only listen
to a given subscription for the duration of a block.

```ruby title="spec/subscribers/my_store/sms_notification_subscriber_spec.rb"
require 'rails_helper'

RSpec.describe MyStore::SmsNotificationSubscriber do
  let(:sms_queue) { SmsService.test_queue }
  let(:subscription) { Spree::Bus.subscription(:sms_notify_order_completed) }

  it 'sends an SMS when an order is finalized' do
    order = create(:order)

    Spree::Bus.performing_only(subscription) do
      Spree::Bus.publish(:order_finalized, order: order)
    end

    expect(sms_queue.count).to be(1)
  end
end
```

#### Stubbing events

Solidus also comes with stub helpers to make it straightforward to test that an event has been
fired.

To begin with, you need to include the `Spree::TestingSupport::BusHelpers` in your test file. After
that, you need to call the `stub_spree_bus` method before asserting that a given event was
published.

```ruby title="spec/services/my_store/custom_service_spec.rb"
require 'rails_helper'
require 'spree/testing_support/bus_helpers'

RSpec.describe MyStore::CustomService do
  include Spree::TestingSupport::BusHelpers

  describe 'call' do
    it 'fires custom event' do
      stub_spree_bus
      order = create(:order)

      described_class.new.call(order)

      expect(:custom_event).to have_been_published
    end
  end
end
```

You can also assert the published payload using the `with` modifier.

```ruby title="spec/services/my_store/custom_service_spec.rb"
# ...
expect(:custom_event).to have_been_published.with(
  a_hash_including(order: order)
)
# ...
```

### Observing events

One of the tricky parts of event-driven design is that it's sometimes challenging to inspect the
flow of the program. Think of debugging, logging, and so on. Omnes comes with a lot of facilities
for observability.

Besides the published event, subscriptions can take a second argument to access the line of code
that published the event and when that happened.

```ruby
Spree::Bus.subscribe(:order_finalized) do |_event, context|
  puts context.time
  puts context.caller_location
end
# 2022-01-01 00:00:00 UTC
# /path/to/file/that/published/the/event:99:in `<main>'
```

There's much more to that. Check [Omnes' README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) for details.

### Upgrading from the legacy event system

[Omnes](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) is the default way to go for event-driven behavior since
Solidus v3.2. However, before that, a custom event system based
on [ActiveSupport::Notifications](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Notifications.html)
was in place. You might need to update your code if you're upgrading from Soldius v3.1 or before.

Once you run the [update generator](/upgrading-solidus/index.mdx#updating-preferences),
you'll have an option `config.use_legacy_events` commented out
in `config/initializers/new_solidus_defaults.rb`. Don't activate it until you've gone through all
the following points. However, you're good to go if your application is not using events for
anything (not subscribing to Solidus events or using custom ones). In that case, you can disable
legacy events straight away and stop reading now.

#### Subscriber modules

* Switch from a subscriber module to an Omnes subscriber. Be sure that event names are given as
a `Symbol`:

```ruby title="app/subscribers/my_subscriber.rb"
# Instead of
module MySubscriber
  event_action :do_something, event_name: :order_finalized
  event_action :order_recalculated

  def do_something(event)
   # ...
  end

  def order_recalculated(event)
    # ...
  end
end
# do
class MySubscriber
  include Omnes::Subscriber

  handle :order_finalized, with: :do_something
  handle :order_recalculated, with: :order_recalculated

  def do_something(event)
   # ...
  end

  def order_recalculated(event)
    # ...
  end
end
```

* Subscribe Omnes subscribers to `Spree::Bus` in an initializer:

```ruby title="config/initializers/omnes.rb"
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  MySubscriber.new.subscribe_to(Spree::Bus)
end
```

#### Block subscriptions

* Rename references from `Spree::Event` to `Spree::Bus`.&#x20;
* Make sure that you subscribe to the event name as a `Symbol`.

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe('order_finalized') {}
# do
Spree::Bus.subscribe(:order_finalized) {}
```

#### Regular expression subscriptions

Regular expression subscriptions are not supported on Omnes by default. They're considered an
anti-pattern, as you could unintentionally subscribe to new events added in the future if their
names match your pattern (e.g., you subscribe to `/order/` and a new event `stock_backordered` is
added).

The chances are that if you're using regular expression subscriptions, your use case is subscribing
to all events regardless of their nature (probably for logging purposes). In that case, you can lean
on Omnes's `#subscribe_to_all` method (or `handle_all` for subscriber classes):

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe /.*\.spree$/ do |event|
  # do_something
end
# do
Spree::Bus.subscribe_to_all do |event|
  # do_something
end
```

If you do want to use a regular expression for subscriptions, you can still use a custom Omnes
matcher with `#subscribe_with_matcher` (or `handle_with_matcher` in a subscriber class):

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.subscribe /order_/ do |event|
  # do_something
end
# do
ORDER_EVENTS_MATCHER = ->(event) { event.omnes_event_name.match?(/order_/) }
Spree::Bus.subscribe_with_matcher(ORDER_EVENTS_MATCHER) do |event|
  # do_something
end
```

#### Publishing events

* Rename `Spree::Event.fire` to `Spree::Bus.publish`.
* Giving a block at publication time is no longer supported. It provided no value, plus its
execution time (before vs. after subscriptions) was confusing:

```ruby
# Instead of
Spree::Event.fire(:my_store_custom_event, order_id: order.id) do
  do_something
end
# do
do_something
Spree::Bus.publish(:my_store_custom_event, order_id: order.id)
```

* Make sure that the published event name is a `Symbol`.
* Register that event in an initializer within
a [#to\_prepare](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Reloader.html#method-c-to\_prepare)
block:

```ruby title="config/initializer/omnes.rb"
Rails.application.config.to_prepare do
  Spree::Bus.register(:my_store_custom_event)
end
```

#### Updating extensions

If you're maintaining an extension that needs to support both the legacy and the new event bus
systems, you can leverage
the [compatibility layer shipped with solidus\_support v0.9](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus\_support/blob/ba3c7d00f2da26f5bf5df54201697fa30c1ac60d/lib/solidus\_support/legacy\_event\_compat.rb)
. Please, check it for details.

:::success

There're many more features supported by Omnes that were not possible with the legacy system, like
async subscriptions, event instances, or the autodiscovery of event handlers from subscribers. This
guide covered the bare minimum to update your store. Please, check
its [README](https://github.com/nebulab/omnes) to extract all the potential that Omnes brings.

:::
