versioned_docs/version-3.2/getting-started/upgrading-solidus.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 2
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Upgrading Solidus

With Solidus' maintenance policy, a release will receive security patches and other critical
bug-fixes for 18 months after it's released to the public. This should give you plenty of time to
upgrade to new versions of Solidus before your release reaches its EOL. You can find a list of the
currently supported Solidus versions on the [Security](https://solidus.io/security/) page of our
website.

Because of the project's focus on stability and backwards compatibility, upgrading Solidus is
usually a painless process: minor releases NEVER break public APIs, although they may deprecate APIs
that will then be removed in the next major.

When upgrading, look at the [changelog](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/v3.0/CHANGELOG.mdx)
and make a note of any large refactoring or public API changes, then update your app accordingly.
You should also make sure to [update any extensions](using-extensions.mdx#staying-up-to-date) you have
installed, since new releases may have come out to support the new Solidus version or take advantage
of new functionality it introduces.

Solidus contains a task to help you with the upgrading process. Remember to run
it when you get hands-on:

```bash
bin/rails g solidus:update
```

It will:

- Copy all new [Solidus database migrations](#updating-the-database) to your host application.
- Generate an initializer to help you [update to the new
  defaults](#updating-preferences).

## Ruby and Rails upgrades

Solidus' policy on Ruby and Ruby on Rails support is fairly simple: each release supports up to the
oldest Ruby and Rails versions that are still maintained.

Solidus 2.10, for instance, introduced support for Rails 6.0, but it also works with Rails 5.2. As
for Ruby, Solidus works with Ruby 2.4 and later, because 2.4 was the oldest maintained version at
the time of release. However, you cannot use Rails 6 with Ruby 2.4, which means you will have to
upgrade to at least Ruby 2.5 if you want to use Solidus with Rails 6.

When you upgrade Solidus, you should also make sure to upgrade your Ruby and Rails versions to the
newest possible versions. Ruby upgrades are usually pretty smooth, while Rails provides
amazing [upgrade guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/upgrading_ruby_on_rails.html) you can
follow.

## Upgrading dependencies

Solidus is just a Rails engine that runs as part of your application, so you should still take care
to regularly upgrade any other dependencies in addition to Solidus. There are tools that can help
you stay on top of version updates, such as [Dependabot](https://dependabot.com/), but in general
the best tool you can employ is a solid suite of automated unit and integration tests that verify
the behavior of your application after an upgrade.

## Dealing with deprecations

:::caution

While it can be tempting to leave calls to deprecated APIs in place and wait for their removal
before fixing them, this approach will come back to haunt you when you upgrade to a new major
version and find that you need to update dozens of method calls that don't work anymore.

:::

It's particularly important to understand how to handle deprecations correctly. The recommended
approach is to fix deprecation warnings as soon as they arise. When you upgrade Solidus, run your
entire test suite and copy all deprecation warnings to a separate file. In Bash, you can easily do
it by running this command from your app's root:

```bash
$ bundle exec rspec 2>deprecations.txt
```

This will save all Solidus deprecations to the `deprecations.txt` file. You will find that this file
contains a lot of duplicates, but you may remove them with another command:

```bash
$ cat deprecations.txt | sort | uniq
```

This will output a de-duplicated list of deprecations in your code. Once you have this, just go
through the deprecations one by one and fix them. Then run your test suite again to ensure your app
doesn't contain any deprecated code.

:::info

In some cases, deprecated code may come from Solidus extensions and not your own app, meaning you
can't fix the deprecation yourself. When this happens, you can open an issue in the extension's
repository to let the maintainer know that they need to update their extension.

:::

## Updating the database

Especially during major version upgrades, when you run the `bin/rails g
solidus:update` task, new database migrations updating the Solidus database
schema might be copied to your host application.

It would be best if you never ran them blindly. Instead, look into them in
detail, understand them, check if they could cause an issue with your production
data, and, if needed, modify them to match your specific situation. Depending on
your data volume, usage, and schema modifications on your side, you might prefer
to ditch them or perform a longer but safer update journey. The documentation
for the [strong_migrations](https://github.com/ankane/strong_migrations) gem
contains helpful tips you can check.

## Updating preferences

There're some aspects of Solidus behavior that you can tweak on your application. For instance,
guest checkouts are allowed by default, but you can change it on the `spree.rb` initializer:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.allow_guest_checkout = false
end
```

Some defaults may change between Solidus versions. Those changes might break the expectations of
your application behavior. For that reason, Solidus comes with the `Spree.load_defaults(version)`
method to ensure that the implicit defaults \(those you're not overriding on `spree.rb`\) stay the
same after an upgrade. This method is called on top of the `spree.rb` file. E.g.:

```ruby
Spree.load_defaults('3.0')
Spree.config do |config|
  # ...
end
```

> If you upgrade from Solidus 3.0 to Solidus 3.1, you won't have the `Spree.load_defaults` call in
> your initializer yet. Please, ensure that you add it before performing the upgrade!

After an upgrade, you should update the version passed to the `Spree.load_defaults` method. However,
before that, you need to check which defaults have changed and decide what to do with them. You have
a couple of options:

* Adapt your application code to integrate the new default.
* Explicitly use the old default in `spree.rb` if you're sure you still want to use it.
* Do nothing if the new default doesn't entail a change from your side.

Recall that Solidus comes with the `solidus:update` generator to help you with
the process:

```bash
bin/rails g solidus:update
```

This command will generate a new initializer called `new_solidus_defaults.rb`. All the defaults that
have changed in the latest version are displayed, each in a commented out line. That allows you to
act on each individual new preference performing one of the options given above. If you want to
integrate a new preference, you only need to uncomment its line. When you're done with all the
defaults, you can flip the version used in `spree.rb`'s `Spree.load_defaults` call and remove
the `new_solidus_defaults.rb` file altogether.

Internally, `Spree.load_defaults` is a shortcut that forwards the same method to the configuration
object for every available Solidus component: core, backend & API. You'll see
that the `#load_defaults` call, with the previous version as an argument, is
disassembled into the individual components in `new_solidus_defaults.rb`. It
gives you more fine-grained control as you can flag as done an individual
component by updating its `#load_defaults` version when you're done with it.

For instance, say that you're upgrading from Solidus 3.0 to 3.1, and three made-up defaults have
changed:

* Core's `:core_pref_one` was `false` and now is `true`.
* Core's `:core_pref_two` was `false` and now is `true`.
* Backend's `:backend_pref` was `'this'` and now is `'that'`.

The generated `new_solidus_defaults.rb` file would look something like the following:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.load_defaults('3.0')
  # config.core_pref_one = true
  # config.core_pref_two = true
end
Spree::Backend::Config do |config|
  config.load_defaults('3.0')
  # config.backend_pref = 'that'
end
```

A sensible approach you could take to leave your application up to date could be:

* Adapt your app to take into account that `core_pref_one` is `true` and uncomment its line in the
initializer.
* Adapt your app to take into account that `core_pref_two` is `true`, remove lines
for `core_pref_one` & `core_pref_two`, and update the `config.load_default` call within
the `Spree.config` block to take `'3.1'` as parameter.
* Adapt your app to take into account that `backend_pref` is `'that'`. Remove
the `new_solidus_defaults.rb` initializer and bump the `Spree.load_defaults` call in `spree.rb`
to `'3.1'`.

Commit message:

Backport Rails support approach changes to older docs
Ref. #105

versioned_docs/version-3.2/getting-started/upgrading-solidus.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 2
needs-diataxis-rewrite: true
---

# Upgrading Solidus

With Solidus' maintenance policy, a release will receive security patches and other critical
bug-fixes for 18 months after it's released to the public. This should give you plenty of time to
upgrade to new versions of Solidus before your release reaches its EOL. You can find a list of the
currently supported Solidus versions on the [Security](https://solidus.io/security/) page of our
website.

Because of the project's focus on stability and backwards compatibility, upgrading Solidus is
usually a painless process: minor releases NEVER break public APIs, although they may deprecate APIs
that will then be removed in the next major.

When upgrading, look at the [changelog](https://github.com/solidusio/solidus/blob/v3.0/CHANGELOG.mdx)
and make a note of any large refactoring or public API changes, then update your app accordingly.
You should also make sure to [update any extensions](using-extensions.mdx#staying-up-to-date) you have
installed, since new releases may have come out to support the new Solidus version or take advantage
of new functionality it introduces.

Solidus contains a task to help you with the upgrading process. Remember to run
it when you get hands-on:

```bash
bin/rails g solidus:update
```

It will:

- Copy all new [Solidus database migrations](#updating-the-database) to your host application.
- Generate an initializer to help you [update to the new
  defaults](#updating-preferences).

## Ruby and Rails upgrades

Solidus' approach on Ruby and Ruby on Rails support is fairly simple: each
minor release supports up to the oldest Ruby and Rails versions that are still
maintained. For major releases, we could remove support for old but maintained
versions if that brings some benefit, but still allowing you to update to a
supported Ruby or Rails version before upgrading Solidus. 

Solidus 2.10, for instance, introduced support for Rails 6.0, but it also works with Rails 5.2. As
for Ruby, Solidus works with Ruby 2.4 and later, because 2.4 was the oldest maintained version at
the time of release. However, you cannot use Rails 6 with Ruby 2.4, which means
you will have to upgrade to at least Ruby 2.5 if you want to use Solidus with
Rails 6. Another example, Solidus 4.0 removed support for Rails 6.0 & Rails
6.1, but, as Solidus 3.4 supports Rails 7, you can first update your store to
Rails 7 and then go for Solidus 4.0.

When you upgrade Solidus, you should also make sure to upgrade your Ruby and Rails versions to the
newest possible versions. Ruby upgrades are usually pretty smooth, while Rails provides
amazing [upgrade guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/upgrading_ruby_on_rails.html) you can
follow.

## Upgrading dependencies

Solidus is just a Rails engine that runs as part of your application, so you should still take care
to regularly upgrade any other dependencies in addition to Solidus. There are tools that can help
you stay on top of version updates, such as [Dependabot](https://dependabot.com/), but in general
the best tool you can employ is a solid suite of automated unit and integration tests that verify
the behavior of your application after an upgrade.

## Dealing with deprecations

:::caution

While it can be tempting to leave calls to deprecated APIs in place and wait for their removal
before fixing them, this approach will come back to haunt you when you upgrade to a new major
version and find that you need to update dozens of method calls that don't work anymore.

:::

It's particularly important to understand how to handle deprecations correctly. The recommended
approach is to fix deprecation warnings as soon as they arise. When you upgrade Solidus, run your
entire test suite and copy all deprecation warnings to a separate file. In Bash, you can easily do
it by running this command from your app's root:

```bash
$ bundle exec rspec 2>deprecations.txt
```

This will save all Solidus deprecations to the `deprecations.txt` file. You will find that this file
contains a lot of duplicates, but you may remove them with another command:

```bash
$ cat deprecations.txt | sort | uniq
```

This will output a de-duplicated list of deprecations in your code. Once you have this, just go
through the deprecations one by one and fix them. Then run your test suite again to ensure your app
doesn't contain any deprecated code.

:::info

In some cases, deprecated code may come from Solidus extensions and not your own app, meaning you
can't fix the deprecation yourself. When this happens, you can open an issue in the extension's
repository to let the maintainer know that they need to update their extension.

:::

## Updating the database

Especially during major version upgrades, when you run the `bin/rails g
solidus:update` task, new database migrations updating the Solidus database
schema might be copied to your host application.

It would be best if you never ran them blindly. Instead, look into them in
detail, understand them, check if they could cause an issue with your production
data, and, if needed, modify them to match your specific situation. Depending on
your data volume, usage, and schema modifications on your side, you might prefer
to ditch them or perform a longer but safer update journey. The documentation
for the [strong_migrations](https://github.com/ankane/strong_migrations) gem
contains helpful tips you can check.

## Updating preferences

There're some aspects of Solidus behavior that you can tweak on your application. For instance,
guest checkouts are allowed by default, but you can change it on the `spree.rb` initializer:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.allow_guest_checkout = false
end
```

Some defaults may change between Solidus versions. Those changes might break the expectations of
your application behavior. For that reason, Solidus comes with the `Spree.load_defaults(version)`
method to ensure that the implicit defaults \(those you're not overriding on `spree.rb`\) stay the
same after an upgrade. This method is called on top of the `spree.rb` file. E.g.:

```ruby
Spree.load_defaults('3.0')
Spree.config do |config|
  # ...
end
```

> If you upgrade from Solidus 3.0 to Solidus 3.1, you won't have the `Spree.load_defaults` call in
> your initializer yet. Please, ensure that you add it before performing the upgrade!

After an upgrade, you should update the version passed to the `Spree.load_defaults` method. However,
before that, you need to check which defaults have changed and decide what to do with them. You have
a couple of options:

* Adapt your application code to integrate the new default.
* Explicitly use the old default in `spree.rb` if you're sure you still want to use it.
* Do nothing if the new default doesn't entail a change from your side.

Recall that Solidus comes with the `solidus:update` generator to help you with
the process:

```bash
bin/rails g solidus:update
```

This command will generate a new initializer called `new_solidus_defaults.rb`. All the defaults that
have changed in the latest version are displayed, each in a commented out line. That allows you to
act on each individual new preference performing one of the options given above. If you want to
integrate a new preference, you only need to uncomment its line. When you're done with all the
defaults, you can flip the version used in `spree.rb`'s `Spree.load_defaults` call and remove
the `new_solidus_defaults.rb` file altogether.

Internally, `Spree.load_defaults` is a shortcut that forwards the same method to the configuration
object for every available Solidus component: core, backend & API. You'll see
that the `#load_defaults` call, with the previous version as an argument, is
disassembled into the individual components in `new_solidus_defaults.rb`. It
gives you more fine-grained control as you can flag as done an individual
component by updating its `#load_defaults` version when you're done with it.

For instance, say that you're upgrading from Solidus 3.0 to 3.1, and three made-up defaults have
changed:

* Core's `:core_pref_one` was `false` and now is `true`.
* Core's `:core_pref_two` was `false` and now is `true`.
* Backend's `:backend_pref` was `'this'` and now is `'that'`.

The generated `new_solidus_defaults.rb` file would look something like the following:

```ruby
Spree.config do |config|
  config.load_defaults('3.0')
  # config.core_pref_one = true
  # config.core_pref_two = true
end
Spree::Backend::Config do |config|
  config.load_defaults('3.0')
  # config.backend_pref = 'that'
end
```

A sensible approach you could take to leave your application up to date could be:

* Adapt your app to take into account that `core_pref_one` is `true` and uncomment its line in the
initializer.
* Adapt your app to take into account that `core_pref_two` is `true`, remove lines
for `core_pref_one` & `core_pref_two`, and update the `config.load_default` call within
the `Spree.config` block to take `'3.1'` as parameter.
* Adapt your app to take into account that `backend_pref` is `'that'`. Remove
the `new_solidus_defaults.rb` initializer and bump the `Spree.load_defaults` call in `spree.rb`
to `'3.1'`.
